MEDICAL MANAGEMENT OF RADIOLOGICAL CASUALTIES
Fourth Edition – July 2013
Military Medical Operations
Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute
Bethesda, Maryland 20889-5603
www.usuhs.edu/afrri

Index
Emergency Response
Introduction
Acute Radiation Syndrome
Biodosimetry
Medical Management of Skin Injury
Medical Management of Internally Deposited Radionuclides
Other Injuries from Nuclear Weapons
Psychological Support
Delayed Effects
Decontamination Techniques
Command Guidance
Appendices

“Radiological and nuclear accidents or incidents remain real threats, and understanding the medical radiobiology of such events
represents a major gap in most emergency preparedness. This manual serves as an informative yet practical instrument in preparing

for and responding to such events.”
–Sidney R. Hinds II, MD, COL, MC, USA
Former Director MMO, AFRRI
This publication is a product of the Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute, a part of the Uniformed Services University of the
Health Sciences under the Assistant Secretary of Defense for Health Affairs. This handbook was prepared by Ronald E. Goans, PhD,
MD, and edited by Military Medical Operations staff. For more information about AFRRI publications, visit our website at
www.usuhs.edu/afrri. To request additional copies of this field guide, e-mail MEIRinquiries@usuhs.edu or telephone 301–295–2950 or
write Military Medical Operations, AFRRI, 8901 Wisconsin Avenue, Bethesda, MD 20889–5603.

Additional Radiation Response Resources
Radiation Emergency Assistance Center/Training Site (REAC/TS):
orise.orau.gov/reacts/
The REAC/TS mission for the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is twofold: Provide 24/7 availability to deploy and provide emergency
medical services at incidents involving radiation anywhere in the world and to
provide advice and consultation on radiation emergency medicine from its Oak Ridge, TN, headquarters.
USG DHHS Radiation Emergency Medical Management (REMM):
www.remm.nlm.gov
Part of the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, REMM provides guidance on radiation-event
diagnosis and treatment for healthcare providers.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), Emergency Preparedness and Response: www.bt.cdc.gov/radiation/
A Government website intended to increase the nation’s ability to prepare for and respond to public health emergencies, including
radiological events.

Emergency Response
Emergency Contact Information
The Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute’s Medical Radiobiology Advisory Team (MRAT) may be reached 24 hours a day at
301-295-0530 to provide further assistance in the event of a radiological/nuclear emergency.

Planning Considerations
This handbook addresses medical management of casualties in the first 72 hours of a radiation event.

The most important consideration in the medical evaluation of a radiation event is the relative magnitude of the situation and the
resources needed to address the emergency. In many cases, order of magnitude estimates of the scale of the event will be sufficient
for emergency response.
Small-scale events are those occurring in laboratories, hospitals, etc., involving small amounts of radionuclides with the
potential exposure and/or contamination of one or a few individuals.
Large-scale events are those involving relatively large quantities of radionuclides and the potential exposure or contamination
of large numbers of people, e.g., terrorist attacks with radiological weapons, nuclear weapons detonation, and large-scale
nuclear power plant disasters.
High-level external ionizing radiation poses the greatest danger to living organisms. Low levels of internal or external contamination
generally pose very low risk. A site known to be radiologically contaminated should be surveyed before entering, and responders
should be advised to limit their time in high dose-rate areas. There is generally no hazard associated with handling a radiologically
contaminated casualty. See the “Decontamination” tab.
U.S. Military Planning
The U.S. military has established a system for mission-specific risk-based dose limits that includes life-saving activities. Military
commanders set their Operational Exposure Guidance (OEG; i.e., dose limits to U.S. troops) in nuclear war. In current doctrine, U.S.
military personnel become restricted from engaging in operational radiological/nuclear missions once they have exceeded a 125-cGy
dose accumulation. For operations other than war, military commanders generally limit OEG levels to 75-cGy. For guidance see JP 311, Operations in Chemical, Biological, Radiological, and Nuclear (CBRN) Environments, 26 August 2008.

Triage
Triage should be conducted based on traditional surgical and medical considerations. Radiation injuries in the absence of trauma are
covered in the “Acute Radiation Syndrome” (ARS) tab, the “Skin Injury” tab, and the “Internal Contamination” tab. Medical aspects of
weapons effects are described in the “Other Injuries” tab.
Radiation interacts synergistically with trauma. Patients with medical or traumatic injury who also have whole-body or significant
partial-body irradiation (combined injury) have a substantially worse prognosis and will require a higher triage priority, as shown in
Table 1.
Table 1. Triage Categories.

For externally irradiated patients without trauma, patients receiving a high dose can be distinguished from those with a dose < 1 Gy
using two criteria: the neutrophil/lymphocyte (N/L) ratio and whether emesis has occurred. A triage score T is assigned as follows.
T = N/L + E, where E = 0 if no emesis; E = 2 if emesis.
In a normal, healthy human population, the N/L ratio from a complete blood count (CBC) with differential has been found to be ~ 2.1.
For time > 4 h post-event, T is significantly elevated for doses > 1 Gy. One study has shown this scoring technique to have a
sensitivity of 89% and a specificity of 93% to separate those with doses < 1 Gy from those with higher doses (N = 226 controls, N = 36
radiation cases; median dose, 3 Gy; REAC/TS Radiation Accident Registry). A cut-point of 3.7 has been chosen to maximize
sensitivity and specificity. If T is > 3.7, the patient should be referred for further evaluation.

Major Medical Issues
Victims of radiological terrorism or wartime events require prompt diagnosis and treatment of medical and surgical conditions as
well as conditions related to radiation exposure. Medical and nursing personnel have never received a significant radiation dose
when providing patient care to radiation casualties. The only exception might occur if highly radioactive shrapnel is embedded in
the patient. This has rarely happened but should be considered in medical planning.
Radiation dose can be estimated early post-event from the medical history, serial blood counts, and the time to emesis (TE).
Dose may be subsequently confirmed with chromosome-aberration bioassay, the current gold standard.
Data from an initial baseline CBC with differential, repeated every six hours, if possible, can be effectively analyzed using the
Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute (AFRRI) Biodosimetry Assessment Tool (BAT).

Lymphocyte depletion follows dose-dependent, first-order kinetics after high-level gamma and criticality incidents, while the N/L
ratio increases over the first few days post-exposure. Both are sensitive indicators of radiation dose.
For TE < 2 h, the effective whole-body dose is at least 3 Gy. For TE < 1 h, the whole-body dose most probably exceeds 4–6 Gy.
Conversely, if the patient has not vomited within 8–10 h post-event, the whole-body dose is likely < 1 Gy.
Medical management of patients with acute, moderate-to-severe radiation exposure (effective whole-body dose > 3 Gy) should
emphasize the rapid administration of colony-stimulating factors (CSFs) to enhance hematopoietic recovery. All of these
compounds decrease the duration of radiation-induced neutropenia and stimulate neutrophil recovery, albeit with some
variability.
Currently, the only hematopoietic CSFs with Food and Drug Administration (FDA) marketing approval for management of
treatment-associated neutropenia are recombinant forms of granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G-CSF, Neupogen),
granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM-CSF, Leukine), and the pegylated form of G-CSF (Neulasta).
Recommended dosages are given in the “ARS” tab.
For patients developing febrile radiation-induced neutropenia, adherence to the current Infectious Disease Society of America
guidelines for high-risk neutropenia is recommended.

Required Initial Labs (Field or Emergency Department; ED)
CBC with differential and repeat q 6 h: To evaluate lymphocyte kinetics and to calculate the N/L ratio.
Serum amylase (baseline and qd after 24 hours). A dose-dependent increase in amylase is expected after 24 hours.

Important Labs to Obtain (If Feasible)
Blood FLT-3 ligand levels: Marker for hematopoietic damage.
Blood citrulline: Decreasing citrulline indicates GI damage.
Cytogenetic studies with overdispersion index to evaluate for partial-body exposure.
Interleukin-6 (IL-6): Marker increased at higher radiation dose.
Quantitative G-CSF: Marker increased at higher radiation dose.
C-reactive protein (CRP): Increases with dose; shows promise to discriminate between minimally and heavily exposed patients.
Serum amylase activity: Increased with dose at 1 d post-irradiation.

Recommended Anti-Emetic Dosages

The following dosages of selective 5-HT3 receptor antagonists are recommended for radiation-induced emesis:
Ondansetron (Zofran, Zofran ODT): Initial, 0.15 mg/kg IV. A continuous IV dose option consists of 8 mg followed by 1 mg/h for
the next 24 hours. Oral dose, 8 mg q 8 h as needed.
Granisetron (Kytril): Oral dosage (tablets), usually 1 mg initially and repeated in 12 hours after the first dose. Alternatively, 2
mg may be taken as one dose. IV dose is based on body weight; it is typically 10 mcg/kg (4.5 mcg/lb) of body weight.
Go to Index

Introduction
Radiologically contaminated patients generally pose no danger to healthcare personnel. Hence, medical professionals must be
prepared to provide prompt treatment of conventional trauma complicated by ionizing radiation or radioactive contamination.
Two principles that strongly influence the medical management of the irradiated patient are:
Early estimation of the magnitude of the radiation event.
Identification of the radioisotope(s) in question.

Radiation Threat Scenarios
The National Council on Radiation Protection Report No. 138 (2001) defines three types of devices by which military personnel could
be exposed to radiation. These affect the way people are exposed to radiation effects and the biological effects to be expected.
Radiation exposure device (RED): radioactive material, in a sealed source or within a container, intended to expose people in
the vicinity of the device to a high-level external dose. Some materials used in military equipment and supplies contain
radioactive components that, if improperly handled, could function as an RED. Industrial radiography sources as shown above
constitute the most prevalent REDs in the civilian sector.
Radiological dispersion device (RDD): any device that causes intentional dissemination of radioactive material without a
nuclear detonation. An RDD can cause organ dose through inhalation of radioactive material in a dispersal plume or ingestion of
materials in the food chain. An RDD would cause conventional casualties to become contaminated with radionuclides and the
contaminated area would complicate medical evacuation.
Improvised nuclear device (IND): device designed to produce a nuclear explosion, at full or partial yield. An IND exposes
people to high-level external dose, trauma, inhalation of radioactive materials, particulate contamination, and ingestion of
radioactive materials in the food chain.
Significant amounts of radioactive material may be deposited on surfaces after the use of any nuclear weapon or RDD, the destruction

of some types of nuclear reactors, a nuclear accident, or improper nuclear waste disposal. Operations in contaminated areas could
result in military personnel receiving sufficient radiation dose or particulate contamination to warrant medical evaluation and
monitoring.
In addition to the above, military personnel can be exposed to radiation from accidents involving storage or transportation of nuclear
materials, industrial sources, or unsecured high-level sources in a hostile environment. For example, military support was an integral
aspect of Project Sapphire, a covert, combined Department of Defense (DoD), Department of Energy (DOE), and Department of State
(DOS) operation to recover highly enriched weapon-grade uranium from Kazakhstan.

Personnel Protection
After a ground burst of a nuclear weapon or RDD, the immediate vicinity would be heavily contaminated and require demarcation until
sufficient radionuclide decay occurred. Areas of contamination could also result from radioactive waste disposal, or industrial or
medical source destruction.
External contamination by radionuclides will occur when people traverse a contaminated area without appropriate barrier clothing.
If an individual is wounded while in the contaminated area, the individual will possibly become internally contaminated. Standard issue
chemical protective masks afford excellent protection from inhalation and ingestion of radioactive material. Radon and tritium gas will
pass through the filters, but short exposures are not medically significant.
Commercial anti-contamination suits (Tyvek anti-c suits) are far from ideal in a tactical military situation and offer little advantage over
standard mission-oriented protective posture (MOPP)-4. However Tyvek suits are preferred if heat stress is a concern and the
contamination threat is only ionizing radiation. Chemical-protective overgarments provide excellent contamination protection as well as
protection from chemical-biological agents.
Standard hospital barrier clothing as used in Universal Precautions is adequate for emergency treatment of limited numbers of
radiologically contaminated casualties. Medical personnel should be decontaminated following emergency treatment and
decontamination of contaminated patients.

Radiation Effects
Ionizing radiation deposits energy into human tissue, thereby disrupting the normal anatomic structure and the physiological actions of
various organs. The pathological effects of radiation are directly related to dose. Dose is defined as the amount of energy deposited by
radiation per unit mass of tissue. It is a total-body injury with different tissues expressing damage over time.

Means of Exposure
An individual may receive radiation dose from an external device, by ingesting or inhaling radiological particulates, or through loose
radioactive material deposited on the skin or equipment. It is usually high-level external radiation from an IND or RED that is lethal in
an acute setting. Ingestion or inhalation of radioactive material may cause internal dose to the whole body or to a specific organ over a
period of time.

Types of Radiation
Four types of radiation are important in military medicine.
Alpha particles: charged particles emitted from heavy nuclei such as U, Pu, or Am. Alpha particles cannot travel far and are
shielded by the dead layer of the skin or clothing. They are therefore a negligible external hazard but can be important if
internalized. Absorption via the GI tract is usually of limited importance, but absorption from wounds can be medically significant.
Beta particles: electrons found in weapons fallout and emitted from isotopes such as tritium and strontium. Beta particles can
travel a short distance in tissue. Large quantities deposited on the skin can damage the basal layer and cause radiation burns.
Beta emitters also are important if internalized.
Gamma rays: photons emitted during a nuclear detonation, by fallout, and in many instances of nuclear decay. They are highly
energetic and pass through matter easily. Because of high penetrability, gamma radiation can result in whole-body exposure and
damage to deep organs. Gamma-emitting nuclides are medically important in external exposure and if internalized.
Neutrons: uncharged particles emitted from the fission process in a nuclear reaction. Neutrons can cause 2–20 times as much
damage to tissue as gamma rays.

Units
The Système International (SI) unit of radioactivity is the becquerel (Bq), defined as 1 disintegration per second (dps) and is equal to
3.7 x 10-10 curies (Ci). Absorbed dose quantifies energy deposited in tissue by ionizing radiation. The SI unit for absorbed dose is the
gray (Gy) and the imperial unit is the rad.
1 Gy = 100 rad
10 milligray (mGy) = 1 rad
Dose rate is the dose per unit of time. Free-in-air dose refers to the radiation dose measured in air at a certain point. Free-in-air dose
is easy to measure with current military field instruments, and more meaningful doses, such as midline tissue dose or dose to the

blood-forming organs, may be estimated by this approximation. Military tactical dosimeters also measure free-in-air doses.
Military or civilian instruments, such as the Geiger-Mueller (G-M) counter or ion chamber, often measure the roentgen (R) or a
submultiple such as mR. The R is a unit of ionization. For military purposes and for essentially all civilian situations, 1 R ~ 1 rad ~ 1
rem. So, even though the units are different, they are often used interchangeably in emergency events and in hospitals.
Differences among radiation types are adjusted by use of a radiation weighting factor (W R ). The dose in rads times the W R yields the
rem, or radiation equivalent in man. The international unit for this radiation equivalency is the sievert (Sv). The W R for x-ray or gamma
radiation is 1, so for pure gamma radiation:
100 rad = 100 cGy = 1000 mGy = 1 Gy ~ 1 Sv = 100 rem = 1000 mSv
For acute medical effects, it is widely considered that the most appropriate unit to use is the rad or Gy. The rem or Sv is useful for
long-term effects such as the risk of radiation-induced cancer. For equivalent units, flip to the “Appendices” tab.

Gamma Ray Exposure Rate
The gamma constant for an isotope is the gamma ray exposure rate in R per hour (R/h), or its international equivalent, at 1 m distance
per Ci of activity. Three common isotopes are thought to be items of interest to terrorist organizations: 192Ir, 137Cs, and 60 Co.
One can use the following approximate gamma constants (point source; within 3% of exact values) that are easy to remember:
60 Co: 4/3 R/h at 1 m distance per Ci
137Cs: 1/3 R/h at 1 m distance per Ci
192Ir: 1/2 R/h at 1 m distance per Ci

Clinical Example – Determining Dose
Event
An individual goes into an abandoned apartment where a new 100-Ci 192Ir source is hidden in the wall. The source, initially intended
for industrial radiography, was diverted to a war zone. The patient goes within 1 m of the source before a colleague warns him of a
suspicious metallic cylinder. He estimates being in the vicinity of the source for 15 minutes. What is his estimated whole-body dose?
Solution
An approximate dose from a small source is the gamma constant, multiplied by the activity of the source, times the amount of time
spent near the source, divided by the square of the person’s distance from the source in meters. The gamma constant for 192Ir is ~ ½
R/h at 1 m per Ci.

Dose = ½ R/h x 100 Ci x ¼ h ~ 12.5 rad
In this case, there would be no acute medical effects to the patient. Reassurance to the patient would be in order regarding medical
issues. Although this is a rough approximation, it is adequate given the usual uncertainty in the individual’s distance from the source
and the time spent near it. The dose rate for a point source decreases as the square of the distance, so the dose would be
substantially smaller at greater distances from the source.
At 1 m dose ~ 12.5 rad
At 2 m dose ~ 12.5 rad/2² = 12.5/4 rad ~ 3 rad
At 3 m dose ~ 12.5 rad/3² = 12.5/9 rad ~ 1.3 rad etc.
It is therefore important to minimize time near a source and maximize distance from it. This case is based on a real event in the civilian
sector.
Go to Index

Acute Radiation Syndrome
ARS results from high-level external exposure to ionizing radiation, either of the whole body or a significant portion (> 60%) of it. For
this purpose, “high-level” means a dose greater than 1 Gy delivered at a relatively high dose rate. Radiation dose can be estimated
early post-event using rapid-sort, automated biodosimetry and multi-parameter methods including the clinical history, Time to Emesis
(TE), lymphocyte depletion kinetics, and multiple biochemical markers. Victims of radiation events require prompt diagnosis and
treatment of medical and surgical conditions as well as conditions related to radiation exposure.

Etiology
Some radiation damage to cells occurs within microseconds of exposure. Radiation damage results from the inherent sensitivity of
certain cell types to radiation, with the most replicative cells being the most sensitive to acute effects. This damage gives rise to a
constellation of clinical syndromes. In the bottom figure right, stem cells damaged by radiation are shown to be pyknotic (dose > 2 Gy).
Normal bone marrow

Irradiated bone marrow

Phases and Syndromes
ARS is an acute illness that follows a roughly predictable course over a period ranging from a few hours to many weeks. Like a viral
illness, it exhibits prodromal symptoms, a latent period, a period of well-defined illness, and a phase of recovery or death. ARS is
characterized by the development of groups of signs and symptoms that manifest the reactions of various body systems to irradiation.
Phases and likely outcome are shown in Table 2.
Table 2. Radiation Effects.

Prodromal signs and symptoms of high-level radiation exposure include anorexia, nausea and vomiting, diarrhea, mild fever,
conjunctivitis if the radiation dose is near the eyes, and possible transient skin erythema.
The ARS includes a subclinical phase (< 1 Gy) and 3 sub-syndromes resulting from whole-body irradiation or irradiation to a significant
fraction of the body.
Hematopoietic syndrome ( > 2 Gy)
GI syndrome (> 6 Gy)
Neurovascular syndrome (> 12 Gy)

Neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, lymphopenia, and often pancytopenia then result from the bone marrow aplasia. From the ensuing
pancytopenia, the patient may experience increased complications, such as sepsis, hemorrhage, and impaired wound healing if there
is concomitant trauma.

ARS and Dose
The clinical syndromes that result from radiation exposure occur within a predictable range of doses after whole-body or significant
partial-body exposure.

Hematopoietic Syndrome
Because of their rapid cell turnover, hematopoietic cells in the bone marrow are among the most radiation-sensitive cells in mammals.
While significant partial-body or whole-body radiation exposures > 1 Gy define the threshold of the hematopoietic syndrome, it
generally is not clinically significant below 2 Gy. Because mitotically active hematopoietic progenitors are unable to divide after a
whole-body exposure > 2–3 Gy, a hematologic crisis results in the ensuing weeks and defines the hematopoietic syndrome. At higher
doses, additional organ toxicities will occur and significantly complicate management. Consequent to the radiation exposure,
lymphopenia, bone marrow atrophy, pancytopenia, and sequelae of infection, bleeding, and poor wound healing occur. All of these
contribute to lethality.

The duration of neutropenia may be prolonged, requiring long-term administration of hematopoietic growth factors, blood product
support, and antibiotics. Patients with burns and/or wounds often suffer from poor wound healing, bleeding, and infection because of
hematopoietic suppression.
Modern supportive care can significantly prolong survival. The mean lethal dose of radiation required to kill 50% of humans at 60 days
(LD50/60) is approximately 3.5–4 Gy in persons managed without significant supportive care. The LD50/60 can be increased to 5–6
Gy when antibiotics and transfusion support are provided. The LD50/60 may be extended to 6-8 Gy with early initiation of colonystimulating factors (CSFs) and optimized care in the intensive care unit (ICU).
Casualties whose radiation dose is most amenable to treatment will be those who receive between 2 and 6 Gy. The primary goal of
medical therapy is to shift the survival curve to the right by about 2–3 Gy. Many casualties whose dose exceeds 6–8 Gy also will have
significant blast and thermal injuries that will preclude survival when combined with their radiation insult. The successful administration
of supportive care is dependent on maintenance of a surviving fraction of stem cells capable of spontaneous regeneration and on
whether the nonhematopoietic injuries are survivable. For the patient to survive, hematopoietic regeneration must result in the
production of functionally normal neutrophils and platelets within the critical, clinically manageable period.
ARS and cutaneous injury with dry desquamation

Gastrointestinal Syndrome
In the higher dose region 6 Gy and above, the patient experiences the GI component of ARS along with the hematological syndrome.
The vulnerability of the small intestine to radiation is primarily in the rapid cell renewal system of the intestinal villi. Radiation sensitivity
of the GI tract occurs primarily because of the high turnover rate occurring within the stem cell and proliferating cell compartment of
the intestinal crypt. Prodromal symptoms may include early, severe nausea, vomiting, and watery diarrhea, often within hours postaccident. In the later period of manifest illness, the patient may experience severe diarrhea with or without fever and vomiting. In
severe cases, the patient may present with shock and possibly renal failure and cardiovascular collapse.

Additional clinical issues with the radiation-induced GI syndrome include malabsorption of nutrients, significant fluid and electrolyte
shifts, GI bleeding, and sepsis from loss of integrity of the villus lining.
Once there is depletion of the epithelial cells lining the lumen of the GI tract, intestinal bacterial gain free access to the body, often
serving as an initial nidus for gram-negative sepsis. In addition, there can be significant hemorrhage through denuded areas. Death
from the gastrointestinal syndrome historically has occurred 8–14 days post-accident. In modern institutions with state-of-the-art
intensive medical care, the survival period can be extended considerably, but death usually occurs, often from multiple organ failure.

Neurovascular Syndrome
When the patient has experienced high external dose greater than 12 Gy, the neurovascular syndrome occurs. At these dose levels,
the patient often will experience a burning sensation immediately post-exposure, nausea and vomiting within minutes, hyperpyrexia,
prostration, hypotension, and neurological signs of ataxia and confusion. Death is inevitable and usually occurs within 24–48 h.
Autopsy often shows cerebral edema and multiple organ pathology.
Early transient incapacitation (ETI) also is associated with very high acute doses of radiation. In humans, it has occurred only during
plutonium and enriched uranium fuel reprocessing accidents. The lower limit is probably 20–40 Gy. The latent period, a return of
partial functionality, is very short, varying from several hours to 1–3 days. Subsequently, a deteriorating state of consciousness with
vascular instability and death is typical. Convulsions without increased intracranial pressure may or may not occur.
Personnel close enough to a nuclear explosion to develop ETI most likely would die due to blast and thermal effects. However, aircraft
crews conceivably could sustain ETI from a nuclear detonation above the atmosphere without blast or thermal injury. Personnel
protected from blast and thermal effects in shielded areas also could sustain such doses. Doses in this range also could result from
military operations inside a reactor facility or fuel reprocessing plant where personnel are accidentally wounded by a nuclear criticality
(chain reaction) event.

Medical Management of ARS
ARS is a sequence of phased symptoms. It is characterized by the relatively rapid onset of nausea, vomiting, malaise, and anorexia.
An early onset of prodromal symptoms in the absence of associated trauma suggests a large radiation exposure. The medical
management of ARS has two primary goals:
Hematological support to reduce both the depth and duration of neutropenia and thrombocytopenia.
Prevention and management of neutropenic fever.
There is a quantitative relationship between the depth of neutropenia and the risk of infectious complications. An absolute neutrophil
count (ANC) < 100/mm3 is the greatest risk factor.

Radiation-induced emesis occasionally may be confused with psychogenic vomiting that often results from stress and realistic fear
reactions. However, judicious use of the medical history may be helpful to differentiate these cases. It also will be helpful to consider
the initial CBC values, particularly the absolute lymphocyte count and whether it decreases over the next 24 hours.
In the case of radiation-induced emesis and for patient comfort, use of oral prophylactic anti-emetics, such as granisetron (Kytril) and
ondansetron (Zofran), have proven helpful. When possible, early oral feeding is preferred to intravenous feeding to maintain the
immunologic and physiologic integrity of the gut.
The spectrum of infecting organisms and antimicrobial susceptibility patterns varies among institutions and over time. Life-threatening,
gram-negative bacterial infections are universal among neutropenic patients, but the prevalence of life-threatening, gram-positive
bacterial infections varies greatly among institutions. For neutropenic fever, it is highly recommended that current recommendations of
the Infectious Disease Society of America (IDSA) be considered.
Hematopoietic growth factors, such as filgrastim (Neupogen), a granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (G–CSF), and its long-acting
pegylated form (Neulasta) as well as sargramostim (Leukine), a granulocyte-macrophage colony-stimulating factor (GM–CSF), are
potent stimulators of hematopoiesis and shorten the time to recovery of neutrophils.
The risks of infection and subsequent complications are directly related to the depth and duration of neutropenia. To achieve maximum
clinical response, filgrastim or sargramostim should be started within 24–72 hours after exposure. This provides the opportunity for
maximum recovery. Cytokine administration should continue, with consecutive daily injections, to reach the desired effect of an ANC
of 1000/mm3 .

Recommended Dosages for the Use of Cytokines
The following cytokines are choices available for patients expected to experience severe neutropenia.
Filgrastim (G-CSF) 2.5–5 µg/kg/d qd subcutaneously (SC) or the equivalent (100–200 µg/m2 /d)
Sargramostim (GM-CSF) 5–10 µg/kg/d qd SC or (200–400 µg/m2 /d)
Pegfilgrastim (pegG-CSF) 6 mg once SC

Hospital Issues for Management of Severe ARS
Antibiotic prophylaxis, as well as antiviral and antifungal agents.
Barrier isolation; GI decontamination.
Early cytokine therapy.
Early surgical wound closure and avoidance of unnecessary invasive procedures.
ARS patients with whole-body dose > 2–3 Gy should be in isolation rooms. Medical personnel should be aware of the need for

rigorous environmental control, including possibly laminar flow isolation, strict hand washing, and surgical scrubs and masks for
staff.
Physiological interventions include maintenance of gastric acidity, avoidance of antacids and H2 blockers, use of sucralfate for
stress ulcer prophylaxis when indicated to reduce gastric colonization and pneumonia, and early oral enteral feeding when
feasible.
Povidone-iodine or chlorhexidine for skin disinfection and shampoo. Meticulous oral hygiene.

Clinical Example – ARS Triage
Event
An IND has detonated in a major urban environment and hundreds of people are crowding your emergency room. Your patient has
normal vital signs, normal primary and second survey, but has vomited repeatedly, beginning approximately 2 hours post-event.
Solution
Using the simple scoring system from the “Emergency Response” tab, the neutrophil to lymphocyte ratio is given for the times below.
Time post-event

N/L ratio

2h

1.32

4.5 h

15.2

9h

9.78

N is obtained from WBC x (% neutrophils) and a similar equation for L. From the differential, N/L = (% neutrophils) / (% lymphocytes)
because the WBC value cancels in the ratio. So, it is most important to order a differential along with the CBC. Popularization of the
N/L ratio in early radiation triage has come from multiple AFRRI scientific staff publications.
Assigning 2 points for emesis gives values of T = 3.32, 17.2, and 11.78 at 2, 4.5, and 9 hours post-exposure. The patient should
therefore be referred for more extensive hematological evaluation. Clinical data in this example is from a real patient with 3.5-Gy acute
gamma dose from a 60 Co source. Data is courtesy of the Radiation Emergency Assistance Center/Training Site (REAC/TS) Radiation
Accident Registry.
Go to Index

Biodosimetry
Biodosimetry is the use of a biological response as an indicator of radiation dose. Cytogenetic biodosimetry is considered the gold
standard for determination of patient whole- or partial-body radiation dose. For biodosimetry guidance call AFRRI at 301-295-0530 or
DSN 295-0530.

Early-Response Multi-Parameter Biodosimetry
No single assay is sufficiently robust to address all potential radiation scenarios, including management of mass casualties and
diagnosis for early medical treatment. Recommendations for use by first responders and first receivers involve a prioritized multipleassay biodosimetric-based strategy. The National Council on Radiation Protection & Measurements (NCRP) Commentary No. 19
(NCRP, 2005) recommends multi-parameter triage (i.e., time to vomiting, lymphocyte kinetics, and other biodosimetry and biochemical
indicators) as the current best early assessment of a victim’s absorbed dose. Early, approximate assessment of dose is not intended
to replace more established, but more time-consuming, techniques of health physics dose reconstruction.
Table 3. Multiple Parameter Biodosimetry.

From Table 3, it is evident that emesis within 1–2 h is particularly serious while a drop in lymphocyte count to 1/2 or 1/3 of baseline
values within 24 hours signals a potentially lethal situation.
After 24 hours, increases in serum amylase are also potentially confirmative. As noted below, early, rapid deployment, highthroughput cytogenetic dosimetry is expected to be very valuable in triage of large numbers of people. Conversely, from the TE data, if
a patient has not vomited in 8–10 h, then any dose is very likely less than 1 Gy and he/she can be moved to outpatient facilities.
Consensus biodosimetric guidelines include the following measurements:
Signs and symptoms
Radioactivity assessment
Hematology
Personal and area dosimetry
Cytogenetics

Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR)-based dose assessment
Serum amylase activity, C-reactive protein, FLT-3 ligand, citrulline, blood protein assays, etc.

Cytogenetic Biodosimetry
Cytogenetic biodosimetry is a widely accepted method for dose assessment following acute whole- or partial-body irradiation.
However, the standard method of scoring 500–1000 metaphase spreads requires about 4–5 days, including timely transport to the
laboratory, processing, reading and scoring the sample, and providing an analysis. Most labs will therefore be able to process no more
than 100–200 samples per day.
Automated metaphase finders are currently available and in use. In addition, research is underway to score only 50–100 metaphases
in order to obtain a cytogenetic triage dose estimate. This is generally satisfactory to guide clinical treatment decisions.
Accepted approaches to cytogenetic dosimetry include dicentric analysis, cytokinesis block micronucleus assay, premature
chromosome condensation, electron paramagnetic resonance, and molecular markers in body fluids and tissues. AFRRI guidance for
the most useful multi-parameter biodosimetric techniques is provided in Table 4.

Dicentric Analysis
Dicentric chromosomes are formed when broken segments of irradiated chromosomes rejoin into chromosomes with two centromeres.
The number of these dicentric chromosomes is a precise measure of dose. In the dicentric assay, stimulated lymphocytes are arrested
and fixed onto slides in metaphase where the chromosomes are condensed. The metaphase spreads are then analyzed for the
presence of dicentric and ring chromosomes.

Based on calibration curves produced from in vitro exposures, a dose estimate can be made according to the number of dicentrics and
rings detected per cell. This assay is generally accepted as the most specific and sensitive (0.1 Gy) method for determining doses
from recent exposures to ionizing radiation (i.e., within days to ~ 6 months). This assay can determine if the body received a
homogeneous dose distribution. However, techniques also exist to determine if the dose is nonhomogeneous.
The usefulness of this assay is greatly reduced for measuring radiation dose received more than 6 months before the assay because
of the half-life of cells with dicentric or ring aberrations.
Radiation-induced chromosome damage is relatively unstable and is eliminated from the peripheral blood lymphocytes as the
lymphocyte pool repopulates. More persistent, stable translocations can be measured using fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH).
In this method, any number of chromosomes can be labeled with chromosome-specific fluorescently labeled DNA probes, allowing
exchanges between chromosomes to be identified using fluorescent microscopy. The stability of these translocations is thought to
remain high over decades. The approach has been used for dosimetry reanalysis of WWII Hiroshima survivors and in civilian radiation
events that happened decades ago.

Cytokinesis Block Micronucleus Assay
The cytokinesis block micronucleus assay is an alternative for biological dosimetry. Micronuclei are formed during cell division when a
whole chromosome or an acentric chromosome fragment does not integrate into the nucleus of the daughter cell. When cytokinesis is
inhibited, binucleated cells result after the first mitotic division, and these binucleated cells can be scored for the presence of
micronuclei. This assay is faster to score and requires less skilled technical staff than dicentric analysis, due to the simple shape of
the micronuclei. The lower detection level is about 0.3 Gy.

Premature Chromosome Condensation (PCC)
One limitation of assays requiring lymphocyte stimulation is that cells receiving higher radiation doses also experience a cell cycle
delay and may never reach mitosis. This can result in a large underestimation of the absorbed dose. Chromosomes, however, can be
forced to condense prematurely by fusing human lymphocytes with Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) mitotic cells in the presence of
polyethylene glycol (PEG). This technique allows measurement of chromosomal aberrations without the requirement for damaged
cells to reach mitosis. Because this assay can better measure the proportion of exposed cells, it is particularly useful in detecting
partial-body exposures and small localized exposures.

Electron Paramagnetic Resonance (EPR)
Exposure of humans to ionizing radiation results in radiation-induced changes that can be measured and, depending on the absorbed
dose, quantified. The use of EPR for biodosimetry is based on the capability of the technique to provide specific and sensitive
measurement of unpaired electrons in solid tissue, which are created in proportion to the absorbed dose. The lifetimes of these
electrons are very short (nanoseconds) in aqueous systems, such as most biological tissues, but can be extremely stable in nonaqueous media, including teeth, bone, fingernails, and hair. EPR has been used for in vitro analyses of exfoliated teeth to measure
doses in populations from Japan and the former Soviet Union. The effectiveness of EPR has been well demonstrated.

Molecular Markers in Body Fluids and Tissues
Molecular markers (biomarkers) represent underlying changes in physiology arising from physical damage (e.g., cell lysis and the
release of intracellular proteins into the circulation, oxidation by-products or DNA breakage), underlying changes in biochemistry (e.g.,
the presence of new metabolites or changes in levels of key gene products), and/or changes in cellular composition of tissues. These
markers include molecules as diverse as proteins and small molecule metabolites.
Within minutes to hours after exposure to ionizing radiation, proteins are modified and activated, and large-scale changes occur in the
gene expression profiles involving a broad variety of cell-process pathways. There are approximately 90 known proteins that show
changes in expression or undergo post-translational modifications after exposure to ionizing radiation. Some of these change in a
dose-dependent fashion. Use of biochemical markers in a multi-parameter assay represents an exciting new development in radiation
dosimetry.
Table 4. Physician Guidance on Choice of Biodosimetry Methods.

AFRRI Biodosimetry Capability
Biodosimetry Assessment Tool (for Windows)
The AFRRI Biodosimetry Assessment Tool (BAT) software (for Windows) is the first comprehensive diagnostic tool to assist Federal
healthcare providers at all levels responsible for the management of radiation casualties. BAT assists with identifying individuals with
significant radiation exposures and making appropriate treatment decisions. BAT promotes rapid data collection of (1) clinical signs
and symptoms, (2) physical dosimetry, and (3) patient demographics, after a radiation exposure incident, and provides the clinician
with a rapid multiparameter dose assessment of the patient. All data can be printed out and archived in accordance with NATO
Standardization Agreement STANAG 2474 NBC/MED.
First-responders Radiological Assessment Triage (for Windows)
The new AFRRI First-responders Radiological Assessment Triage (for Windows) – WinFRAT – enables radiological and nuclear
emergency response professionals to rapidly triage suspected radiation casualties based on the initial, or prodromal, features listed in
the Emergency Radiation Medicine Response – AFRRI Pocket Guide. WinFRAT collects, records, and assesses data regarding
radiation dose exposure.
With minimal text entry, WinFRAT accepts (1) signs and symptoms, (2) blood lymphocyte counts, and (3) dosimetry data. WinFRAT
will assess the multiparameter triage dose or the exposure without an assigned dose, or will indicate there is no evidence of
overexposure. It also generates dose-specific messages addressing (1) reliability and diagnostic information, (2) hospitalization
estimations, and (3) mortality projections.

Medical Recording Forms
AFRRI offers medical recording forms to assist in exposure assessment. The AFRRI Field Medical Record (AFRRI Form 330) is a
one-page form for gathering patient emergency medical information in a field setting. The AFRRI Biodosimetry Worksheet (AFRRI
Form 331) is a six-page form to record patient exposure data, capturing biomarkers, BAT input, and Medical Treatment Protocols
(METREPOL) data. These forms are available from the AFRRI website.

Cytogenetic Specimen Collection Procedure
Before Sending Any Samples:
Contact AFRRI Military Medical Operations’ (MMO) Medical Radiobiology Advisory Team (MRAT) physician, who may be reached at
301-295-0530. He/she will coordinate with the AFRRI Biodosimetry Team and provide an appropriate mailing address.
The AFRRI Biodosimetry Team will discuss the patient and provide, by fax, an informed consent form. Because this is an experimental
procedure at this time, only limited numbers of samples can be processed.
To ensure successful accomplishment of cytogenetic tasks, it is important that the cytogenetic laboratory receive blood samples as
soon as possible after collection. To expedite freight to AFRRI, coordinate blood sample collection with flight/courier schedules to
minimize delay, exposure to extreme temperatures, and exposure to ionizing radiation during transit.
Instructions for Blood Collection:
1. Obtain informed consent from the patient and have the consent form filled out and signed; provide a copy to the patient.
2. Coordinate the blood collection time with the shipping/flight schedule to ensure that the AFRRI Biodosimetry Team will receive
the specimen within 32 hours of collection. Use of a courier is advisable to assure successful transport.
3. Using a Vacutainer sleeve and sterile needle, draw 4 to 5 tubes of blood (approximately 40 mL) into 8-mL sterile Vacutainers
containing lithium heparin, for freight to AFRRI. Label each tube. Several Vacutainers are provided as backups in the event that
some tubes lose their vacuum.
4. Immediately after blood collection, gently invert Vacutainer tubes to mix the blood and anticoagulant. Clotted blood samples
cannot be used.
5. Blood samples must be kept cool, but not frozen after collection and during shipment.
6. Individually wrap Vacutainers in the protective materials provided and pack in the insulated container. Secure tubes with paper
or other coolant packing material to prevent breakage during freight handling.

7. Label the package “DO NOT X-RAY, BIOHAZARD, BIOLOGICAL SAMPLE, FRAGILE.”
8. Ship samples as soon as possible for express delivery by courier or special carrier, such as Federal Express or Airborne
Express, to AFRRI at the address provided.
9. Notify the AFRRI Biodosimetry Team of the shipping carrier and shipping number as soon as possible. International shipments
should be sent by courier to allow rapid customs transit.
Go to Index

Medical Management of Skin Injury
Dose and Clinical Signs
Acute local irradiation events may occur separately or coexist with ARS. Radiation injury to the skin is common in the civilian sector
where many radiation devices are in industrial use. Deterministic thresholds exist as follows for certain clinical signs:
3 Gy for epilation, beginning 14–21 days post-incident.
6 Gy for erythema, often transient soon post-incident, with secondary erythema 14–21 days thereafter. The pathophysiology for
erythema includes arteriolar constriction with capillary dilation and local edema. Erythema may occur in a few hours postaccident (primary erythema) or come and go in waves.
10–15 Gy for dry desquamation of the skin secondary to radiation to the germinal layer, usually > 20 days post-incident. Dry
desquamation results from response of the germinal epidermal layer to radiation. There is diminished mitotic activity in cells of
the basal and parabasal layers with thinning of the epidermis and desquamation of large macroscopic flakes of skin.
20–50 Gy for wet desquamation (partial thickness injury) at least 2–3 weeks post-exposure, depending upon dose. In moist
desquamation, microscopically, one finds intracellular edema, coalescence of vesicles to form macroscopic bullae, and a wet
dermal surface, coated by fibrin.
> 50 Gy for overt radionecrosis and ulceration secondary to endothelial cell damage and fibrinoid necrosis of the arterioles and
venules in the affected area. A cutaneous syndrome, arising from high-level whole-body irradiation along with local injury, also
has been described by various authors.
X-Ray Accident Clinical Example
Within the first week post-accident, the patient is asymptomatic, with possibly an early wave of transient erythema. In week 2, true
erythema develops along with progressive epilation, suppression of sweating, and diminished sebaceous gland secretion. In week 3,
the patient often presents with warm skin that is edematous, painful when touched, with occasional severe pruritis, and symptoms that

are generally limited to the radiation field. By week 4, overt dry or wet desquamation has evolved in a dose-dependent manner in skin
exposed to the radiation field.
0 days post-accident

24 days post-accident

33 days post-accident

45 days post-accident, post-debridement (REAC/TS)

Treatment
The usual U.S. experience in partial-body exposure has been high-level, low linear energy transfer exposure to relatively small areas
of skin, either from sealed sources or from x-ray or accelerator accidents. For a clinically significant lesion to occur generally requires
that more than 10 cm 2 of the basal layer of skin have been irradiated. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) recently
published physician guidelines for grading cutaneous radiation injury:
Extensive lesion from 192 Ir source (Courtesy IAEA)

Grade I: > 2 Gy
Grade II: > 15 Gy
Grade III: > 40 Gy
The medical history is particularly important in diagnosis of the extent of partial-body injury because signs and symptoms generally
take days to weeks to manifest. In addition, serial color digital photographs are crucial, possibly along with drawings of the lesion.

These allow more precise documentation of the evolution of cutaneous necrosis.
In the U.S., diagnosis of high-level skin dose generally has been estimated by observing the serial evolution of symptoms. However,
additional diagnostic tools used have included cytogenetic dosimetry, positron-emission tomography (PET) scans, magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI), ultrasound visualization of the lesion, and Doppler or laser flow profiles. The key management issues with
cutaneous radiation injury are infection control, state-of-the-art wound care, and appropriate pain management. Also, it often is very
helpful to obtain the services of a plastic or reconstructive surgeon early in the clinical course.
Histopathology showing radiation-induced fibrosis of arteriole (left); IAEA

Radiation-induced skin and organ fibrosis and late skin radionecrosis are delayed complications that usually are considered
irreversible. Typical medical management includes eliminating local and general aggravating factors and controlling acute and chronic
inflammation with steroids.
Radiation necrosis can be managed based on the etiology.
Anti-inflammatory treatment with topical corticosteroids
Vascular therapy with hyperbaric oxygen (HBO) and pentoxifylline (Trental, PTX) or PTX-vitamin E combination
Wound management and surgical guidance by physicians experienced in the management of chronic vascular injury

Clinical Example – Multi-Parameter Analysis of Partial- Body Radiation Injury
A new 137Cs source (100 Ci) is placed in a restaurant. Unaware of this fact, an individual visits the restaurant, sees a metallic objet,
and puts it in his pocket. Two days later, he reports to the nearest hospital complaining of redness to his right buttock and mild tingling
in the area. As the emergency physician, you see an apparently healthy 26-year-old male with normal initial vital signs. Moderate
vomiting begins 2 hours later. On history, the patient reports the object. It is produced and sets off a portal monitor in the ED.
Appropriate officials are notified.
Blood is drawn for a CBC with differential every 6 h, and the patient is admitted for observation. An initial consult is obtained from a
plastic and reconstructive surgeon as well as from a hematologist.
It now appears to attending physicians that a major radiation event may have occurred. A medical consult is requested from AFRRI.
Repeat CBCs show decreasing lymphocytes and a slightly rising neutrophil count. Consultant physicians order a multi-parameter

partial-body irradiation blood panel and chromosome biodosimetry as indicated. The patient experiences nausea multiple times, and
granisetron, 1 mg, is administered IV every 12 h prn (pro re nata; as needed).
A multi-parameter blood panel drawn the next day shows the following results: i lymphocytes; h amylase x 4 (450 IU/L); h N/L ratio;
FLT-3, 100 pg/mL (h x 10); h CRP 100 µg/mL (h x 100); normal citrulline; h x 10 IL-6 and h x 30 gCSF; cytogenetic results, estimated
3.5 Gy whole-body dose; Poisson dispersion index, 1.35.
The Poisson dispersion index is defined as the variance of the statistical distribution divided by the mean, which should equal unity in a
perfect Poisson process. This significant deviation is strongly suggestive of nonuniform partial-body injury. In the U.S., analysis of
overdispersion of dicentric chromosomes from the expected Poisson distribution most commonly employs the Qdr technique of
Sasaki.

Conclusion
Early ARS with significant partial-body irradiation. Institute supportive measures and cytokine therapy as medically indicated. Monitor
for impending neutropenia, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenic fever. Institute IDSA guidelines for antibiotic therapy when appropriate.
Consider platelet transfusion as medically indicated.
Go to Index

Medical Management of Internally Deposited Radionuclides
Internal Contamination
Internal contamination will occur when unprotected personnel ingest, inhale, or are wounded by radioactive material. Any externally
contaminated casualty who did not have respiratory protection should be evaluated for internal contamination. Internal contamination
is more likely if significant contamination is found on the face or around or in the nostrils.
Medical management is specific and isotope-dependent; consequently, identifying the isotope is crucial. Metabolism and elimination
kinetics of the nonradioactive analog determine the metabolic pathway of the radionuclide. The major routes of intake are inhalation,
ingestion, absorption through an open contaminated wound, and transdermal absorption. Dissolution of uranium from embedded
depleted uranium (DU) shrapnel also has been noted.
Forces operating in a theater with nuclear power reactors may be at risk if enemy forces target those reactors and their containment
facilities. Downwind Service members could internalize significant amounts of iodine-131 and other fission by-products. MOPP
equipment will provide more than adequate protection from particulate radiological contamination. The standard NBC (nuclear,
biological, chemical) protective mask will prevent inhalation of any particulate contamination, but not radioactive gases.

After prolonged use in a contaminated area, filters should be checked with a radiation instrument prior to disposal. Normal hospital
barrier clothing also will provide satisfactory emergency protection for hospital personnel attending wounded and contaminated
soldiers.

Approaches to Medical Management
The medical management of internal contamination falls into several major categories:
Reducing and/or inhibiting absorption of the isotope in the GI tract. Examples: Use gastric lavage or cathartics.
Blocking uptake to the organ of interest. Example: Within 4 hours of exposure, administer potassium iodide (KI) to block uptake
of radioactive iodine by the thyroid.
Diluting the isotope. Example: Increase fluid hydration for internal tritium contamination.
Altering the chemistry of the substance. Example: Prevent deposition of uranium carbonate complexes in the renal tubules by
use of sodium bicarbonate.
Displacing the isotope from receptors. Example: Administer stable iodine to displace 99 mTc.
Using traditional chelation techniques. Example: Administer DTPA for internal deposition of plutonium.
Excising radionuclides from wounds early to minimize absorption.
Using bronchoalveolar lavage for severe cases of insoluble inhaled particles. This rarely used technique would be expected only
in a case with a very large lung burden of an insoluble alpha emitter such as plutonium.
There are over 8000 isotopes, but the military and civilian sectors consider only 15 important with regard to terrorism and industrial
accidents. Certain isotopes fall into general categories:
University seven: 3 H (tritium), 14 C, 32 P, 60 Co, 125I, 131I, 252Cf. Used in medicine and for isotopic labeling in biochemistry
laboratories.
Industrial three: 192Ir, 137Cs, 60 Co. 192Ir is widely used in industrial radiography to photograph large objects, such as oil pipes,
airplane wings, etc. 137Cs and 60 Co are used in industry because of their penetrating gamma rays and are considered prime
agents for terrorism events.
Military four: 3 H (tritium), 235U, 239Pu, and 241Am. Isotopes primarily used in the weapons complex, both in the Department of
Energy (DOE) system and in the military.
Fission products: Products of a weapon explosion, either an IND or a weapon of full or significant yield. Often volatile and pose
a significant risk to the populace.
NCRP 161 (2008) is widely considered an important reference document for decorporation therapy in patients with internal deposition
of radionuclides. Tables 5 and 6 are adapted from that guidance.

Therapy for Specific Radionuclides

This section provides (1) recommendations for decorporation therapy for specific radionuclides, and (2) drug information for treatment.
Table 5 summarizes treatment recommendations for various radionuclides of concern in the medical management of internal
contamination. Table 6 provides dose schedules for drug or treatment modalities.
Table 5. Decorporation Therapy Recommendations in the USA for Radionuclides of Concern.

Table 6. Dose Schedules for Drug or Treatment Modalities.

KI Blockage of the Thyroid
Children are particularly susceptible to thyroid cancer following exposure to radioactive iodine. The uptake of radioactive iodine should
be blocked by administering oral potassium iodide (KI) within 4 hours of exposure.
Table 7. Potassium Iodide Recommended Doses.

Tritium
Tritium ( 3 H) is a hydrogen isotope with a nucleus composed of two neutrons and one proton. Tritium is the only radioactive isotope of
hydrogen, decaying with emission of a very low-energy electron. It is used in nuclear weapons, in luminescent gun sights, and in
muzzle-velocity detectors. It is unlikely to be a radiation hazard except in a closed space.
Tritium has certain characteristics that present unique challenges for dosimetry and for health-risk assessment. For example, in the
gas form, tritium can diffuse through almost any container and, in the oxide form, cannot be detected by commonly used survey
instruments. In the environment, tritium is taken up by all hydrogen-containing molecules and therefore distributes widely on a global
scale. Tritiated water (HTO) is taken easily into the body by inhalation, ingestion, or transdermal absorption. It is instantaneously
absorbed and mixes with body water.
Dose to total body water is therefore the critical issue in the management of tritium accidents. Tritium also can be incorporated into
organic molecules in the body to form longer-lasting, organically bound tritium.
Medical management of tritium intake is directed primarily to increasing body water turnover. Tritium is almost never a significant
radiation hazard. It is excreted in urine, and urine samples will be positive within an hour of significant exposure. No adverse health
effects have been reported from a single, acute exposure.
For accident dosimetry purposes, tritium retention is assumed to have a half life of approximately 10 days. Single exposures are
treated by increasing oral fluid intake. This has the dual value of diluting the tritium and increasing excretion by physiological
mechanisms.
An increase in oral fluids of 3–4 liters/day reduces the biological half-life of tritium by a factor of 2–3 and therefore reduces whole-body

dose in the same proportion. Bioassay is generally accomplished by 24-hour urine collections that are analyzed by liquid scintillation
counting.
In a high-level exposure, intravenous hydration, management of fluid intake and output, and use of diuretics is a possible modality for
increasing turnover of body water, but historically, this rarely has been necessary. In all cases, care must be taken to avoid water
intoxication.

Depleted Uranium
Depleted uranium (DU) is not a significant health hazard. It is not a weapon of mass destruction. It is addressed in this manual for
medical treatment issues. DU is defined as uranium metal in which the concentration of uranium-235 has been reduced from the 0.7%
that occurs naturally to a value less than 0.2%. DU is a heavy, silvery white metal, a little softer than steel, ductile, and slightly
paramagnetic. In air, DU develops a layer of oxide that gives it a dull black color.
DU is useful in kinetic energy penetrator munitions as it is also pyrophoric and literally ignites and sharpens under the extreme
pressures and temperatures generated by impact. As the penetrator enters the crew compartment of a target vehicle, it brings with it a
spray of molten metal as well as shards of both penetrator and vehicle armor (spall), any of which can cause secondary explosions in
stored ammunition.
After such a penetration, the interior of the struck vehicle will be contaminated with DU dust and fragments and with other materials
generated from armor and burning interior components. Consequently, casualties may exhibit burns derived from the initial penetration
as well as from secondary fires. They also may have been wounded by and retain fragments of DU and other metals. Inhalation injury
may occur from any of the compounds generated from metals, plastics, and components fused during the fire and explosion.
Wounds that contain DU may develop cystic lesions that solubilize and allow the absorption of the uranium metal. This was
demonstrated in Persian Gulf War Veterans who were wounded by DU fragments. Studies in scientific models have demonstrated that
uranium from such wounds will slowly be distributed systemically with primary deposition in the bone and kidneys. DU emits alpha,
beta, and weak gamma radiation. Due to the metal’s high density, much of the radiation never reaches the surface of the metal. It is
thus self-shielding. Uranium-238, thorium-230, and radium-226 will be the most abundant isotopes present in a DU-ammunition round
and its fragments.

Intact DU rounds and armor are packaged to provide sufficient shielding to stop beta and alpha radiation. Gamma-radiation exposure
is minimal although crew exposures could exceed limits for the U.S. general population (1 mSv) after several months of continuous
operations in an armored vehicle completely loaded with DU munitions. The maximum annual exposure allowed for U.S. radiation
workers is 50 mSv.
Internalization of DU through inhalation of particles in dust and smoke, ingestion of particles, or wound contamination presents
potential radiological and toxicological risks. Single exposures of 1–3 µg of uranium per gram of kidney can cause irreparable damage
to the kidneys. Skeletal and renal deposition of uranium occurs from implanted DU fragments. The toxic level for long-term chronic
exposure to internal uranium metal is unknown. The heavy-metal hazards are possibly more significant than the radiological hazards.
For insoluble compounds, the ingestion hazards are minimal because most of the uranium will be passed through the GI tract
unchanged.

Sodium bicarbonate makes the uranyl ion less nephrotoxic. Tubular diuretics may also be beneficial. DU fragments in wounds should
be removed whenever possible. Laboratory evaluation should include urinalysis, 24-hour urine for uranium bioassay, serum blood
urea nitrogen, creatinine, beta-2-microglobulin, creatinine clearance, and liver function studies.
All fragments larger than 1 cm in diameter should be removed if the surgical procedure is practical. Extensive surgery solely to remove
DU fragments is not indicated. If DU contamination is suspected, the wound should be thoroughly flushed with irrigating solution. If a
DU fragment is excised (see figure) after wound healing has occurred, care should be taken to avoid rupturing the pseudocyst that
may be encapsulating the DU fragment. In experimental studies, this cyst is filled with a soluble uranium fluid. Capsule tissue often is
firmly adhered to the remaining metal fragment.
Go to Index

Other Injuries from Nuclear Weapons
Nuclear weapons cause traumatic injuries as well as injuries due to radiation. These injuries arise from high pressures and winds, the
flash from the nuclear detonation, a thermal pulse, and secondary fires.
Immediate treatment should focus on the trauma rather than radiation effects. Surgical priorities for acute or life-threatening injury

must precede any treatment priority for associated radiation injury. In combined injury events, all surgical procedures must be
accomplished as quickly as possible and wound closure must be completed within 36–48 hours from irradiation, because of radiation
induced cell damage.

Blast Injury
Two types of blast forces occur in a nuclear detonation: direct blast wave overpressure forces and indirect blast wind drag forces.
Blast wind drag forces produce casualties due to flying debris (missiles) or to casualties being blown against objects and structures in
the environment (translational injuries). Overpressure forces are strong enough to displace large objects such as vehicles or to cause
buildings to collapse, causing serious crush injuries comparable to those seen in earthquakes and bombings. Personnel in
fortifications or armored vehicles are protected from thermal and blast wind effects but may be subjected to overpressures as blast
waves enter structures and are reflected and reinforced.
Blast casualties will require evaluation for acute trauma in accordance with advanced trauma life support. Response to therapy will be
complicated by immune system compromise and delayed wound healing due to any concomitant irradiation.
Military personnel also may experience motor and cognitive performance decrement, retinal burns, flash dazzle, and loss of night
vision.
Pneumothorax and pneumoperitoneum: Treat by appropriate surgical intervention. Delayed sequelae such as pulmonary
failure may result from severe barotrauma. In the presence of traumatic injury, hypotension must be considered to be due to
hypovolemia and not to concomitant head or radiological injury.
Spinal injuries: Treat with immobilization.
Suspected fractures: Splint.
Open wounds: Debride thoroughly and remove all contaminants, including radioactive debris.
Tympanic membrane rupture: Delay treatment if necessary.

Wounds and Radiation
A wound that is left open and allowed to heal by secondary intention can serve as a potentially fatal focus of infection in a radiationinjured patient. Wound healing is markedly compromised within hours of radiation injury.
If at all possible, wounds should be closed primarily as soon as possible. Extensive debridement of wounds may be necessary to allow
primary closure. Traditionally, combat wounds are not closed primarily due to the high level of contamination, devitalized tissue, and
subsequent morbidity and mortality of the closed-space contamination, but survival of a radiation/combined injury patient will require
aggressive therapy.
A decision to amputate an extremity that in ordinary circumstances would be salvageable will rest with the surgeon in the first 2 days

following a combined injury. No studies are available regarding the use of aggressive marrow resuscitation.
If surgery cannot be completed at far-forward locations, patients with moderate injury will need early evacuation to a level where
surgical facilities are immediately available.

Thermal Injuries
Thermal burns will be the most common injuries. Thermal radiation from a nuclear detonation causes flash burns from absorption of
infrared energy and flame burns from fires in the environment.
Since the thermal pulse is direct infrared, exposed skin will absorb the infrared, and the victim will be burned on the side facing the
explosion. Any object between personnel and the fireball will provide a measure of protection. Some protection against thermal flash
also can be achieved by loose, light-colored clothing, possibly reducing the injury to partial thickness burns.
Firestorm and secondary fires will cause typical flame burns, compounded by closed-space fire-associated injuries. Other likely
injuries include toxic gas injury from burning plastics and other material, superheated air inhalation burns, steam burns from ruptured
pipes, and all other large conflagration injuries.
Clothing made of natural fibers should be worn next to the skin because complications in the treatment of skin burns may arise from
melting of synthetic fibers. These burns will not be limited to exposed surfaces.
The respiratory system also may be exposed to the effects of hot gases. Respiratory system burns are associated with severe
morbidity and high mortality rates. Early endotracheal intubation is advisable whenever airway burns are suspected.

Eye Injuries
Sudden exposure to the high-intensity visible light and infrared radiation of a detonation will cause eye injury, specifically to the
chorioretinal areas. Individuals looking directly at the flash will receive retinal burns. Eye injury is due not only to infrared energy but
also to photochemical reactions that occur in the retina with light wavelengths in the range of 295–1400 µm.
Direct optical equipment such as binoculars will increase the likelihood of damage. Night vision apparatus electronically amplifies and
reproduces the visual display but does not amplify the infrared or damaging wavelengths and will not cause retinal injury.
Flash blindness occurs with peripheral observation of a brilliant flash of intense light energy, for example, a fireball. This is a temporary
condition that results from a depletion of photopigment from the retinal receptors. The duration of flash blindness can last several
seconds when the exposure occurs during daylight. The blindness will then be followed by a darkened afterimage that lasts for several
minutes. At night, flash blindness can last for up to 30 minutes.

Combined Injury
Combined injury is generally defined as radiation injury plus significant mechanical trauma or burns. Human radiation exposure events
such as the Hiroshima and Nagasaki bombings or the Chernobyl accident were combined injury events. Combined injury would also
be expected after a radiological or nuclear attack in an urban area. It is generally accepted in scientific circles that all combined injuries
carry a worse prognosis than for irradiation alone.
General medical considerations after detonation of a small-yield weapon include not only ARS effects but also thermal burns, blast
overpressure effects, cutaneous burns from fallout, possible inhalation of fission products, and delayed effects over years. When
combined injury is superimposed in a radiation-injured system, trauma symptoms often mask and exacerbate the first reliable signs of
radiation injury.
The synergistic lethality of radiation combined injury is an important consideration. The mechanisms underlying increased mortality
associated with complex radiation injuries are still under investigation.

Thresholds for Weapons Effects
Thermal and pressure effects may be significant. A thermal flux of 2–3 cal/cm 2 is sufficient for a first-degree thermal burn, 4–5 cal/cm 2
for a partial-thickness burn, and 6–8 cal/cm 2 for a full-thickness burn. Tympanic drum rupture in young adults begins at 5 psi
overpressure. The threshold for pulmonary edema is approximately 12–15 psi peak overpressure, with damage increasing linearly with
overpressure. The LD50 for pressure effects is approximately 50 psi.
For thermal burns, the scaling is linear; e.g., the thermal energy received at a specified distance from a W KT explosion is W times
that for a 1 KT burst. As a reference, most paper ignites at approximately 10 cal/cm 2 .
Overpressure calculations are slightly more complicated. The range to which a given overpressure extends scales as the cube root of
the yield.

Distribution of Injuries
Various mathematical simulations have examined the distribution of injury in a low-yield weapon event. One predicted distribution of
injury is as follows. Single Injury (30%) would include radiation injury (R) 5–15%, thermal burns (B) 15–20%, and trauma and wounds
(W) 5–10%. Combined injury (70%) is estimated to have R+W+B approximately 20–30%, R+B 30–40% and W+B 5–10%.
Of the documented casualties at Hiroshima, 44% had thermal burns, 57% trauma, and 26% radiation injury. Hospital damage was

severe. Of 45 initial hospitals in operation, only 3 were left standing and able to function to any reasonable degree. Physician and
nursing casualties also were severe. The number of physicians registered in Hiroshima prior to the blast was 298; 28 were uninjured
and 59 were functional post-event. Of the 1780 nurses registered in the city, 1654 became casualties.
Go to Index

Psychological Support
Proper treatment of the psychological consequences of nuclear events is crucial to the long-term well-being of communities and their
members.

Immediate Psychological Response
Radiation elicits fear in both military and civilian populations. Often this fear is considerably out of proportion to the true medical
significance of the radiation-related event. Radiation illness symptoms in just a few people can produce devastating psychological
effects on an entire community or unit that is uninformed about the physical hazards of radiation. This acute anxiety has the potential
to become the dominant source of emotional stress in a unit. Military members may be more likely to focus on radiation detection to
the exclusion of other hazards, and thus increase the potential of conventional injuries.

Minimizing Combat Stress Effects
The number of combat stress casualties depends on the leadership, cohesiveness, and morale of a unit. Positive combat stress
behaviors, such as altruism and loyalty to comrades, will occur more frequently in units with exceptional esprit de corps. Survivor guilt,
anticipation of a lingering death, large physical casualty numbers, and delayed evacuation all contribute to acute stress.

Long-Term Psychological Effects
Long-term psychological effects of radiation exposure can manifest years after the causative exposure. Those who have been
exposed may experience feelings of vulnerability, post-traumatic stress, chronic anxiety, and loss of control. The patient also may
experience fear for the safety of future generations.
Affected individuals appear to fall into one of three groups:
Distressed

Behavioral changes
High risk to develop psychiatric illness
Common reactions may manifest as sadness, anger, fear, difficulty sleeping, impaired ability to concentrate, disbelief, or nonspecific
somatic complaints. This condition is often referred to as MIPS, or multiple idiopathic physical symptoms.
Outcomes vary widely. Most individuals improve over time, but for a few individuals, the course is less benign. Physicians and
psychologists must remember that people with no prior history are vulnerable to psychiatric illness after a radiation exposure. This
also could include crucial emergency response and field medical staff.

Treatment
A well-organized, sustained, effective medical response will instill hope and confidence, reduce fear and anxiety, and support the
continuity of basic military and community functions. Casualties should be treated with the primary combat psychology maxims of
proximity, immediacy, and expectancy in order to minimize long-term consequences. Treat casualties close to the unit, as early as
possible, and communicate expectations that they will return to their units.
Following a radiation event, military personnel likely will turn to trusted healthcare providers or mentors for information and guidance.
Healthcare providers therefore will play a key role in determining the long-term care and medical surveillance of soldiers’ response to
a radiological event. General healthcare providers should be able to care for these patients with proper information about the potential
long-term effects of radiation injury and with liberal referral to psychiatric or psychological services.
It is common in health physics radiation dosimetry calculations for some time to elapse before final results are available. During this
time period, ensuring consensus among experts can help to allay patient fear and anger.

Psychological Counseling Regarding the Delayed Effects of Radiation Injury
Medical personnel at all levels of care need to be knowledgeable concerning the worry and psychological distress that patients
experience regarding delayed effects of radiation exposure.
Go to Index

Delayed Effects
Delayed effects of radiation include radiation-induced carcinogenesis, genetic issues in offspring, late organ effects (typically vascular
changes, fibroatrophy, and thyroid dysfunction), cataracts, and infertility.

Studies on Long-Term Effects of Radiation
The Biological Effects of Ionizing Radiation Committee 7 of the National Academy of Sciences, in its recent report (BEIR VII, 2006),
extensively considered the mathematical risk-dose models currently in use. The BEIR VII committee concluded that the best model for
the risk of delayed effects is still the linear non-threshold (LNT) model. The LNT model proportionally relates risk of developing a
delayed effect to absorbed dose.
The Dosimetry System 2002 (DS02) is the latest dose reconstruction from the Hiroshima and Nagasaki weapon events. A large cohort
of radiation survivors have been followed since 1945. Statistically significant evidence is noted for radiation-induced leukemia of all
varieties except chronic lymphocytic leukemia (CLL). In addition, radiation-induced carcinoma has been reported for the breast,
thyroid, colon, stomach, lung, and ovary. Borderline or inconsistent results are noted for radiation-induced carcinoma of the
esophagus, liver, skin, bladder, and central nervous system (CNS) as well as for multiple myeloma and lymphoma.

Cancer Risk
The BEIR VII report is an authoritative source on the risk of low-level radiation-induced cancer. BEIR VII estimates that 43 out of
every 100 people in the United States will be diagnosed with cancer. Of these, one cancer out of the 43 could be radiation-related if
that individual had received a dose of 100 mSv (10 rem). Risk furthermore is considered linear at lower or higher doses below the
threshold for deterministic effects (0.5–0.75 Sv).
American Cancer Society statistics (2001-2003) suggest 1 in 2 males will have cancer in his lifetime and that the rate for women is 1 in
3. An average of these rates is consistent with the 43% incidence suggested by BEIR VII.

Clinical Example – Long-Term Cancer Risk
Event
Estimate the extra cancer risk for a young man acutely exposed to 0.1-Gy (10-rad) whole-body 137Cs gamma radiation.
Solution
BEIR VII estimates that approximately one cancer per 100 people (1%) could result from a single exposure to 0.1 Sv (~ 10%/Sv). This
patient would have a natural probability of ~ 50% of eventually getting cancer. With a 0.1-Gy dose, the extra risk of getting cancer in
his lifetime is therefore ~ 1%, for a total of ~ 51%. The reader should note that risk estimates among various Federal agencies,
advisory groups, and international committees vary a bit (BEIR VII, IAEA, NCRP, EPA, etc.), but all are generally in the above range.
As a working number, physicians generally consider the extra risk of fatal radiation-induced cancer to be ~ 5%/Sv above background

values. This is often helpful in patient counseling.

Non-Cancer Effects
Radiation also causes late effects other than cancer. These include cataracts (particularly of the posterior pole of the lens),
hyperparathyroidism, and a decrease both in T-cell mediated immunity and in the B-cell humoral response. Survivors of in utero
exposure have also experienced infant microcephaly, mental retardation, growth and development delay, lower IQ, and poor school
performance.
Radiation-induced cataracts are well documented, most notably seen in the posterior pole of the lens. Neutrons are particularly
effective in cataract formation.
Cataract from 21-year-old woman 805 m from hypocenter at Nagasaki

The threshold dose for cataract formation is approximately 2 Gy (greater with fractionated doses). At a 40-Gy dose to the eye,
approximately 100% will form cataracts. The latency period ranges from 2 months to 35 years. In general, with increased dose to the
eye, the latency period decreases.

Radiation and Pregnancy
Pregnant patients almost always are worried about possible fetal effects from radiation exposure. However, no statistically significant
effects have been noted for medically significant irradiation before conception. If irradiation occurs during transit of the blastocyst
down the fallopian tube, an “all or none” effect is generally noted. If uterine implantation is successful, the pregnancy generally has a
successful outcome.

According to data from Hall and Giaccia in Radiobiology for the Radiologist, 6th edition (2006), during the gestational period from day
10 to week 25, a dose of 10 cGy (10 rad) is considered the cutoff point at which a pregnancy termination might be considered, based
on medical issues relevant to the mother, the wishes of the couple, the possibility of CNS damage and intellectual disability of the
child, religious background of the parents, and many other factors. This will help to put into perspective the magnitude of dose that
physicians and their patients should discuss during pregnancy.
For a uterine dose > 0.5 Gy, growth retardation, gross congenital malformations, and microcephaly have been the predominant effects
noted. Interestingly, there has been no report of external irradiation inducing morphologic malformation in a fetus unless it also exhibits
growth retardation or a CNS anomaly. The highest risk of mental retardation is irradiation of the fetus during the period of major
neuronal migration (8–15 weeks). At a 1-Gy fetal dose, approximately 75% will experience mental retardation.
Exposure to high levels of radiation is also clearly a risk factor for childhood leukemia. Japanese adult atomic bomb survivors had a
20-fold increased risk of developing acute leukemia (except CLL) usually within 6–8 years after exposure. Studies on in utero
exposure and childhood exposure to low levels of radiation show mixed results.
Go to Index

Decontamination Techniques
Safety of Healthcare Personnel
Radiologically contaminated patients generally pose no danger to healthcare personnel. It is virtually impossible for a living patient to
be so contaminated as to pose a threat to healthcare providers. The hazard from a radiologically contaminated casualty will be
negligible, both to attending medical personnel and the facility, so necessary medical or surgical treatment must not be delayed
because of possible contamination. Unlike chemical contaminants, radiological material active enough to be an immediate threat can
be detected from several meters away.

Initial Management
The initial management of a casualty contaminated by radiological agents is to perform all immediate life-/limb-saving actions without
regard to contamination. All casualties entering a medical unit after a radiological attack should be considered contaminated unless
certified as noncontaminated. Radiological decontamination (the removal of radioactive particles from surfaces) demands a significant
contribution of resources and can take substantial time. Decontamination should never interfere with medical care and contaminated
casualties should not be barred entry from a medical facility if entry is necessary for life-saving care.

Decontamination Techniques
Radiological decontamination is performed in an identical manner to doctrinal chemical decontamination. The main difference is in
timing. Chemical decontamination is an emergency. Radiological decontamination is not. Personal decontamination is
decontamination of self.
Casualty decontamination refers to the decontamination of casualties. Personnel decontamination usually refers to decontamination of
noncasualties. Mechanical decontamination involves measures to remove radioactive particulates, for example, by filtering drinking
water.
Removal of outer clothing and shoes and rapid washing of exposed skin and hair removes ~ 90% of contamination. The 0.5%
hypochlorite solution used for chemicals also will remove radiological contaminants, but plain soap is often more available and is
preferred. Take care to avoid irritating the skin. Some radionuclides can be absorbed directly through the skin, and the likelihood is
increased if the skin becomes erythematous. Surgical irrigation solutions should be used in liberal amounts in wounds, the abdomen,
and the chest. All such solutions should be removed by suction, if feasible, instead of sponging and wiping.
If practical, the effluent should be sequestered and disposed of appropriately. Normal hospital barrier clothing is adequate to prevent
contamination of medical personnel. Only copious amounts of water, normal saline, or eye solutions are recommended for the eye.
For contaminated wounds, see below.
Radiation detectors can locate external radioactive material. The most common contaminants will emit primarily alpha and beta
radiation. Gamma-radiation emitters may cause whole-body irradiation. Beta emitters when left on the skin will cause significant burns
and scarring. This can be prevented by washing off the contaminants. Alpha radiation does not penetrate the epithelium. External
contamination of the skin and hair is particulate matter that can be washed off.
Decontamination is usually performed by the emergency service and, ideally, prior to arrival at medical facilities. As this will not always
be possible, decontamination procedures should be part of the operational plans and guides of all divisions and departments to
ensure flexible response and action and to prevent delay in needed medical treatment.
Routine patient decontamination is performed under the supervision of medical personnel. Moist cotton swabs of the nasal mucosa
from both sides of the nose should be obtained, labeled, and sealed in separate bags. These swabs can be examined for evidence of
radioactive particle inhalation. Significant decontamination will occur in the normal emergency evaluation of patients by careful
removal and bagging of clothing.
Removal of MOPP and other exterior garments during the course of resuscitation will remove nearly all contamination except where
the suit has been breached. During initial decontamination in the receiving areas, bandages are removed and the wounds are flushed.
The bandages are replaced only if bleeding recurs. Unlike chemical agents, radioactive particles will not cause acute injury, and
decontamination sufficient to remove chemical agents is more than sufficient to remove radiological contamination.
Careful examination of the body with certified radiacs such as the AN/VDR–2 and the AN/PDR–77 will confirm adequate
decontamination. Particular attention must be paid to the hands, fingers, face, hair, and feet. For alpha emitters, a count of < 1000
disintegrations/minute and for beta radiation < 1 mR/h (10 µSv/h) is clean. Gamma radiation may be detectable at up to twice the local

background levels in the decontaminated individual.
Radiological particulate transfer can be resolved by a second deliberate decontamination at the medical treatment facility. This will
help prevent the spread of contamination to areas of the body previously uncontaminated, contamination of personnel assisting the
patient, and contamination of the medical facility. In most cases of contamination of equipment and buildings, a mixture of normal
housecleaning methods will remove the material. Vacuum cleaners that can handle wet material and have high-efficiency filters are
particularly useful. Some surfaces may require repeated scrubbing and vacuuming before they are free of contamination.

Wound Contamination
Local wound contamination by particulate matter should be removed if possible. Alpha and beta emitters left in the wound will cause
extensive local radiation damage and may be absorbed into the systemic circulation and redistributed as internal contaminants. If
possible, a glove-covered radiac probe should be placed carefully into the dried wound, without touching any of the wound surfaces.
Do not contaminate the probe with radioactive particles, body fluids, or talcum powder! Tissue fluids or protective gloves may
prevent the detection of alpha and weak beta particles. After determining that adequate decontamination has been obtained, the
wound should again be thoroughly irrigated with saline or other physiologic solution. Aggressive surgery such as amputation or
extensive exploration should not be undertaken to “eliminate radioactive contamination.” The surgical damage will far exceed any
potential decrease in lifetime radiological exposure risk.

Decontamination of Partial-Thickness Burns
Partial-thickness burns should be thoroughly irrigated and cleaned with mild solutions to minimize irritation of the burned skin. Blisters
should be left closed; open blisters should be irrigated and treated in accordance with appropriate burn protocols. In full-thickness
burns, radioactive contaminants will slough in the eschar. As there is no circulation in the burned tissue, contaminants will remain in
the layers of dead tissue.
The presence of radiological contamination can be confirmed readily by passing a radiation detector (radiac) over the entire body.
Open wounds should be covered prior to decontamination. Contaminated clothing should be removed carefully, placed in marked
plastic bags, and removed to a secure location within a contaminated area. Bare skin and hair should be thoroughly washed; if
practical, the effluent should be sequestered and disposed of appropriately. Excision of wounds is appropriate when surgically
reasonable. Radioactive contaminants in the wound surfaces will be removed with the tissue.
Go to Index

Command Guidance

Medical Guidance for Commanders
Line commanders will require practical advice from their medical officers concerning radiation effects on their personnel. Radiation
effects must not be minimized or exaggerated. Risks must be considered relative to other combat hazards. For acute doses < 1.25
Gy, medical guidance to the commander should be based on long-term effects, primarily increased lifetime cancer risk, of exposure to
radiation above normal occupational levels.
The previous Allied Command Europe (ACE) Directive 80-63 defines measures to be taken against the health hazards of low-level
radiation. Such health hazards should not significantly affect the operation per se but would contribute to the risk of developing longterm health problems. With exposures < 1.25 Gy, the overall effectiveness of combat units will not be degraded. Above this threshold,
tactical commanders must be advised of their forces’ diminished capability to fight.
Newer references have commented on the principles in ACE Directive 80-63. These guidelines technically apply only to units under
ACE. NATO STANAG 2473 is a commander’s guide to radiation exposures in non-article 5 crisis response operations. Joint
Publication 3-11 (26 August 2008) considers operations in chemical, biological, radiological, and nuclear (CBRN) environments. Both
documents are available on the Internet.

Effects on Individual and Unit Performance
The phrase “combat effective” is used for personnel suffering radiation sickness signs and symptoms to a limited degree but who will
be able to maintain at least 75% of their pre-exposure performance level. Individuals identified as “performance degraded” would be
operating at 25%–75% of their pre-exposure performance level. Those identified as “combat ineffective” should be considered
capable of performing their tasks at 25% (at best) of their pre-exposure performance level.
The radiation exposure status (RES) of a given unit is based on the operational exposure above normal background radiation. It is
designed to be an average, based upon unit-level dosimeters, and is not useful for the individual casualty.
Medical officers may adjust a unit’s RES after careful evaluation of the exact exposure status of individual members of the unit. When
possible, both physical and biological dosimetry should be used. The unit status should reflect the arithmetic mode of the available
radiation exposure history of all individual members. Any unit member whose exposure status is more than one full category (or
subcategory in operations other than war) greater than the mode should be replaced. A command health physicist should be
consulted whenever possible.
When the dose rate is known to be less than 50 mGy per day, dosimetry should be available to allow the RES category to be reduced
after 3 months at normal background levels.
When individual dosimetry is unavailable, a period of 6 months since the last radiation exposure above background is sufficient to
upgrade a unit’s RES status one category (or subcategory) one time only. Table 8 shows the effects of exposures from RES 0 through
1E.

Go to Index

Appendices
Table 8. Radiation Injuries and Effects of Radiation Exposure of Personnel.

Units
Table 9. Système International of Units – Conversions.

Table 10. Acronyms and Abbreviations.

Citations

Go to Index

