Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies:
A Guide for State and Local Public Health Planners

Developed by the
Radiation Studies Branch
Division of Environmental Hazards and Health Effects
National Center for Environmental Health
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

April 2014

Please send your comments and suggestions to the Radiation Studies Branch at CDC via
e-mail (rsbinfo@cdc.gov) or mail them to:
Radiation Studies Branch
Division of Environmental Hazards and Health Effects
National Center for Environmental Health
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
4770 Buford Hwy (MSF-59)
Atlanta, GA 30341
Electronic copies of this document can be downloaded from:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/pdf/population-monitoring-guide.pdf

Preface
The first edition of Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies was published in 2007 after
extensive collaboration with representatives from many local, state, and federal agencies and
nongovernmental organizations who provided expert input.
Since the publication of the 2007 edition, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) staff
and its partners have presented the content of this guide at national and regional technical meetings
and training sessions throughout the country to a variety of public health audiences. The content of
the guide has been used in the design and conduct of drills and exercises at local, state, and federal
levels. States are beginning to incorporate population monitoring into their radiation emergency
response plans as awareness of this important preparedness element continues to increase.
The operational concept of the community reception center (CRC)—first described in the 2007
edition—is also being incorporated in radiation emergency response plans across the country. To
support this effort, CDC has developed a number of training and planning tools and resources
specifically related to population monitoring and CRC operations.
This second edition of Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies is similar in structure to the
first edition. However, it incorporates recommendations received from users and new information
from a number of recent national and international consensus documents related to population
monitoring. In addition, the expanded appendices contain detailed descriptions of related tools and
resources that CDC has developed since 2007.
A list of acronyms used in this guide can be found in Appendix A, and a glossary of terms can be
found in Appendix B.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page i

Acknowledgments
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) thanks the many individuals and organizations
that have provided input for this document, beginning with the population monitoring roundtable that
was held in Atlanta, Georgia, on January 11-12, 2005.1
CDC wishes to thank specifically the representatives from the following agencies and organizations
which participated in the Population Monitoring Interagency Working Group beginning in November
2005 and provided valuable input during development of the 2007 edition of this guide:
American Red Cross (ARC)
Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors, Inc. (CRCPD)
U.S. Department of Energy National Nuclear Security Administration (DOE/NNSA)
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS)
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC)
Oak Ridge Associated Universities (ORAU)
Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education (ORISE)
Radiation Emergency Assistance Center/Training Site (REAC/TS)
State of California Department of Public Health
CDC also acknowledges ORAU for its assistance in the final preparation of this guide. The principal
authors of this document are Armin Ansari, PhD, CHP, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention,
and Kevin Caspary, MPH, Oak Ridge Associated Universities.

1 The summary report from the 2005 Roundtable on Population Monitoring Following a Nuclear/Radiological

Incident, including the list of participants, is available at http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/pdf/population­
monitoring-roundtable.pdf.

Page ii

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Table of Contents
1.0 Introduction .....................................................................................................................................1
2.0 Scope...............................................................................................................................................2
2.1 States with Operating Nuclear Power Plants ............................................................................2
3.0 Guiding Principles ...........................................................................................................................3
4.0 What Is Population Monitoring?.....................................................................................................4
5.0 What Radiation Incidents Should Be Addressed in Emergency Response Plans?.....................5
6.0 What Are the Roles and Responsibilities of Federal, State, Tribal, and Local Public Health
Agencies? ........................................................................................................................................6
7.0 What Are the Key Considerations in Planning for Population Monitoring?.................................7
7.1 Objectives of Population Monitoring..........................................................................................7
7.2 Identifying and Prioritizing the Affected Population .................................................................7
7.2.1 Special Populations.............................................................................................................8
7.3 Population Monitoring (The Initial Hours)..................................................................................9
7.3.1 Contamination Screening Criteria ................................................................................... 10
7.3.2 Radiation Survey Methodology ........................................................................................ 11
7.3.3 Clothing Services .............................................................................................................. 11
7.3.4 Transportation Services ................................................................................................... 12
7.3.5 Washing Facilities............................................................................................................. 12
7.3.6 Registration....................................................................................................................... 13
7.3.7 Collection of Clinical Samples ......................................................................................... 13
7.3.8 Worker Protection............................................................................................................. 14
7.4 Population Monitoring (Day 2 and Beyond) ........................................................................... 14
7.4.1 Setting Up Community Reception Centers...................................................................... 14
7.4.2 Practical Considerations for Community Reception Center Operations ....................... 16
7.4.3 Pets.................................................................................................................................... 17
7.4.4 Scaling for Size of Incident .............................................................................................. 17
7.4.5 Screening for External Contamination and Conducting Decontamination ................... 18
7.4.6 Screening for Internal Contamination and Conducting Decontamination.................... 19
7.5 Dose Assessment and Laboratory Capabilities ..................................................................... 20
7.6 Psychosocial Issues ................................................................................................................. 21
7.7 Registry..................................................................................................................................... 22
7.8 Radiation Dose Reconstruction .............................................................................................. 23
7.9 Training..................................................................................................................................... 23
7.10 Communications.................................................................................................................... 24
8.0 Additional Information About This Guide.................................................................................... 25

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page iii

Appendix A: Acronyms ........................................................................................................................A-1
Appendix B: Glossary......................................................................................................................... B-1
Appendix C: Additional Considerations After a Nuclear Detonation............................................... C-1
Appendix D: Radiological Screening Criteria—External Contamination.......................................... D-1
Appendix E: Radiological Screening Criteria—Internal Contamination........................................... E-1
Appendix F: Community Reception Center Specifications...............................................................F-1
Appendix G: Community Reception Center Training and Planning Tools....................................... G-1
Appendix H: Sample Community Reception Center Staffing Plan.................................................. H-1
Appendix I: Pharmaceutical Countermeasures .................................................................................I-1
Appendix J: Additional Resources...................................................................................................... J-1

Page iv

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

1.0 Introduction
This planning guide presents an introduction to population monitoring in radiation emergencies for
public health officials and emergency preparedness planners at the state, tribal, and local levels.
Developed by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) with extensive input from its
partners, it focuses on planning a public health response to radiological or nuclear terrorism
incidents involving large populations.
Population monitoring2 is an essential, often overlooked element in emergency response planning.
Many critical components of population monitoring should be put in place in the first few hours after
the incident, before the arrival of federal assets that might be used to assist in the monitoring
efforts. State and local emergency response and public health authorities can use this guide to






evaluate their emergency response plan to determine if it adequately addresses
population monitoring.
identify staffing needs, training requirements, and necessary material assets.
prioritize training needs for their staff.
further develop local and state health volunteer programs by identifying available
resources to meet population monitoring needs.
be better prepared to prioritize allocation of personnel and material resources in the
response to a radiation emergency.

Population Monitoring in Radiation
Emergencies focuses on the significant
effort required to identify, screen,
measure, and monitor populations
(people and their pets) for exposure to
radiation or contamination from
radioactive materials. The guide also
presents the concept of establishing
community reception centers (CRCs) to
provide contamination screening and
decontamination services to people
displaced by a large-scale radiation
incident. CRCs will be established to
assess people for exposure,
contamination—and the need for
decontamination—and to register people for follow-up monitoring, medical assessment, or medical
management if necessary. As discussed later, sites used for alternate care sites or points of
dispensing (PODs), already in many public health emergency response plans, may be used for CRC
operations with some additional staffing and resources.
As planning efforts progress, consider the size of the community and the characteristics of the
population (age distribution, health status, mobility, diversity, density, etc.).
Planners should explore and consider all potential resources that could be available locally.
Consider resources that could be available through agreements with adjoining jurisdictions, as well
as the assistance required from federal responders, to conduct population monitoring.
Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies was developed with input from multiagency working
groups that included physicians, health physicists, emergency services personnel, mental health
practitioners, environmental scientists, and international specialists in radiation-related treatment,

2 The term “public monitoring” used in the context of radiation emergency response has the same meaning as

population monitoring.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 1

monitoring, and risk assessment. CDC has made every effort to ensure the information included is
accurate and consistent with sound radiation protection and assessment methods, policies, and
practices.

2.0 Scope
This planning guide is specifically intended for public health and emergency preparedness personnel
involved in planning for response to a radiation emergency. The following assumptions are made:



The incident does not involve biological or chemical agents. In such a case, radiation
issues may be overshadowed by more immediate health concerns related to those
chemical or biological agents.
The local response infrastructure is relatively intact. In the case of a nuclear detonation,
this assumption is not likely to hold. See Appendix C for discussion of population
monitoring after a nuclear detonation.

This document does not address environmental monitoring, assessment, or remediation.

2.1 States with Operating Nuclear Power Plants
In the United States, 31 states have
operating nuclear power plants.3 Public
health planners in those states already
have local plans for responding to an
incident at a nuclear power plant in their
state or in a neighboring state. These
plans include requirements related to
population monitoring.4 These plans
have also resulted in well-established
working relationships with planning
partners in the state radiation control
program and federal partners in the
Federal Emergency Management Agency
(FEMA) and the Nuclear Regulatory
Commission (NRC). In addition, states
with operating nuclear power plants work
with area hospitals that already have plans developed for receiving and treating patients as a result
of a radiation incident.
Effective response to a radiological or nuclear terrorism incident requires a broader scope of
planning and most likely a different mode of response than that described in nuclear power plant
emergency plans. Plans need to account for the suddenness of an incident (as opposed to nuclear
power plant failure, which would likely unfold over a 24- to 72-hour period); the likelihood that the
incident would be larger in scale, involving a much larger urban population; and the unknown aspect
of the radionuclide(s) involved. The plans and expertise already developed in states with nuclear
power plants can be assets in preparing for a radiological or nuclear terrorism incident with or
without mass casualties.

3 A listing of operating nuclear power plants in the United States is available at www.nrc.gov/info-finder/reactor.
4 See NUREG-0654/FEMA-REP-1, Criteria for Preparation and Evaluation of Radiological Emergency Response

Plans and Preparedness in Support of Nuclear Power Plants, available at www.nrc.gov/reading-rm/doc­
collections/nuregs/staff/sr0654/.

Page 2

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

3.0 Guiding Principles
Several key principles specific to radiation are important in planning for response to a radiation
incident, including planning for population monitoring.
1. The first priority is to save lives: respond to and treat the injured first. Treatment of lifeor limb-threatening medical conditions should take precedence over decontamination.
Standard Precautions are generally adequate to provide protection for first responders,
emergency medical personnel, and clinicians.5
2. Contamination with radioactive materials is not immediately life-threatening.
Decontamination procedures are straightforward; removing clothing and washing the
body thoroughly with mild soap and water will eliminate most external contamination.
3. Initial population monitoring activities should focus on preventing acute radiation health
effects. Cross-contamination issues are a secondary concern, especially when the
contaminated area or the affected population is large.6
4. Scalability and flexibility are important parts of the planning process. The criteria used
for contamination screening and the radiation survey methods may have to be adjusted
to accommodate the magnitude of the incident and availability of resources.
5. Fear of radiation is high, perhaps higher than with other agents of terrorism. Providing
information and clear communication prior to and during an incident will help allay fears
and allow people to make appropriate response decisions.
6. A key resource for implementing activities described in this guide is a state’s lead agency
for radiation control. Additional expertise and resources to plan for and respond to a
radiation incident can be obtained from radiation protection professionals in each
community. Local emergency response plans should identify experts such as health
physicists or radiation safety officers in area health departments, environmental
agencies, hospitals, and universities. Relationships with these experts should be
established in the planning stages.
7. First responders and local officials may not be aware initially that a radiation incident has
occurred. Public health and emergency personnel’s initial response to an incident may
be an all-hazards approach. However, once these personnel have determined that
radiation or radioactive material is involved, they must begin addressing the issues
related to this type of incident.
8. Radiological decontamination recommendations differ from those for chemical or
biological agents. Decontamination for chemical or biological agents must be performed
immediately. In a radiation emergency, people may be advised to self-decontaminate at
home or at a community reception center. Decontamination should be done as soon as
possible, but it usually does not require the same immediacy as chemical or biological
contamination does.

5 Standard Precautions (previously known as Universal Precautions) are the minimum infection prevention

practices that apply to all patient care, regardless of suspected or confirmed infection status of the patient, in
any setting where health care is delivered. See CDC’s Guide to Infection Prevention for Outpatient Settings:
Minimum Expectations for Safe Care, May 2011, available at
www.cdc.gov/HAI/settings/outpatient/outpatient-care-gl-standared-precautions.html.
6 Cross-contamination refers to spreading of radioactive materials from one person, object, or place to another.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 3

9. Law enforcement agencies will be involved in response to a radiological terrorism
incident. If a radiation incident is the result of a terrorist attack, the site will be
considered a crime scene. Close coordination with local, state, tribal, and federal law
enforcement agencies will be required to manage the public health response, because
both public health and law enforcement personnel will need to conduct operations in the
same area.7

4.0 What Is Population Monitoring?
Population monitoring is a process that begins soon after a radiation incident is reported and
continues until all potentially affected people have been monitored and evaluated for the following:







Needed medical treatment
The presence of radioactive contamination on the body or clothing (external
contamination)
The intake of radioactive materials into the body (internal contamination)
The removal of external or internal contamination (decontamination)
The radiation dose received and the resulting health risk from the exposure
Long-term health effects

These assessments, with the exception of long-term health effects, should be accomplished as soon
as possible following an incident. Long-term health effects are usually determined through a
population registry and an epidemiologic investigation that will likely span several decades.
The population to be monitored includes the people in the affected community. In addition, pets
may also be included because many people consider them part of their families and will make
decisions on that basis. The term population monitoring, as used in this manual, does not refer to
the monitoring of facilities, farm animals, vegetation, or the food supply. The U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, and the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
have plans and procedures for monitoring the environment, facilities, and the food supply.
To conduct population monitoring, specific instruments are used to survey for radioactive
contamination on the body. This is also referred to as monitoring or screening for external
contamination. Other instruments and laboratory tests may be needed to determine if and how
much radioactive material has been taken into the body. This is also referred to as monitoring or
screening for internal contamination. Additional assessments may be needed to determine total
radiation dose to an individual or to a population. This is referred to as radiation dose assessment.

7 For more information on working with law enforcement after a radiation emergency see CDC’s
Radiological/Nuclear Law Enforcement and Public Health Investigation Handbook, September 2011, available
at
http://www.emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/pdf/radiological%20nuclear%20handbook%2009%2001%2011.pdf.

Page 4

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

5.0 What Radiation Incidents Should Be Addressed in Emergency
Response Plans?
Government authorities and other experts believe a real probability exists that radiological or nuclear
devices could be used in a terrorist attack in the future. Therefore, public health authorities should
plan for the potential use of radiological or nuclear devices that could quickly overwhelm crisis
management personnel. These devices can be grouped into the following categories:
RDD (Radiological Dispersal Device): a device or process used to disperse radioactive
material, thereby exposing people and the environment to radiation. Dispersal of
radioactive material may be noticeable—for example, from an explosion (commonly
known as a dirty bomb)—or it may be silent. An example of a silent dispersal is
contamination of the food or water supply. Responders and local officials will know
that an RDD has been used when radiation is detected by proper instrumentation or
through notification by a law enforcement agency. Even though the health risks may
be low or, in case of a dirty bomb, the scope of the physical damage may be limited,
a significantly large number of people may need to be monitored for possible
contamination.8
RED (Radiation Exposure Device): a weapon of terror whereby a high-intensity
radiation source is placed in a public area to expose people in close proximity (for
example, an industrial radiography source placed under the seat of a bus).
Radioactive contamination is not spread, and people do not become radioactive.
Rather, prolonged exposure to a high-intensity source may lead to acute radiation
syndrome (ARS) or to cutaneous radiation injury (CRI), also known as radiation burns.
IND (Improvised Nuclear Device): fissile or fissionable material, such as uranium
233, uranium 235, or plutonium 239, engineered in such a way that when
detonated, it releases significant amounts of energy, creating a shock wave, intense
heat and light, and a cloud of radioactive material, also known as fallout. INDs are
improvised in the sense that the nuclear material is stolen and then assembled in a
makeshift fashion. The damage and deaths associated with an IND will vary
according to the technical skills of the perpetrators, its detonation location, the level
of shielding in an urban environment, and building construction materials. Most
damage and deaths are likely to be centered nearest the detonation point, and
injuries (e.g., burns, blindness, and lacerations) will occur among people farther
away. The smallest INDs are on the order of 1–10 kilotons of equivalent
conventional explosives.
Strategic Nuclear Weapon: a state-sponsored, designed, engineered, and tested
weapon. These weapons are tens to hundreds of times more powerful than INDs and
may become terrorism threats if acquired by adversaries.

8 The polonium-210 poisoning incident in London (November 2006) had the characteristics of an RDD. Even
though the incident apparently targeted only one person, hundreds of people in several countries, including the
United States, were monitored for potential contamination as a result of casual contact with contaminated
objects and locations.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 5

6.0 What Are the Roles and Responsibilities of Federal, State,
Tribal, and Local Public Health Agencies?
If a radiation incident occurs, the chief executive officer of that community (the tribal leader, mayor,
city manager, or county manager) is responsible for coordinating the overall local response and
resources. State, tribal, and local public health agencies will have many responsibilities, including
the following:
















Protecting the public’s health and safety
Monitoring workers’ health and safety
Ensuring provision of health and medical services
Ensuring safe shelters for displaced populations
Ensuring the safety of food and water supplies
Coordinating sampling and laboratory analysis of clinical, agricultural, and environmental
samples
Conducting field investigations
Monitoring people who may have been contaminated with radioactive materials or
exposed to radiation (population monitoring)
Conducting or assisting in decontamination
Developing criteria for temporary re-entry, operations within, and permanent return to the
incident site
Recommending disease prevention and control measures
Recommending management protocols for affected populations or individuals
Communicating necessary information to medical providers
Communicating situation assessments and required safety measures to the public
Assisting law enforcement agencies with the criminal investigation

Local health agencies may call on state health officials, who in turn may request assistance from the
federal government.
The Nuclear/Radiological Incident Annex of the National Response Framework describes how federal
agencies will coordinate a response to nuclear or radiological incidents. Under this annex, the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) is responsible for the following population
monitoring activities:





Coordinating federal support for external monitoring of people
Assisting local and state health departments in establishing a registry of potentially
exposed people
Performing dose reconstruction
Conducting long-term monitoring of the exposed population for potential long-term health
effects

These services will be provided to support the affected state or states. As a general rule, during the
initial stages of the incident local and state officials should be prepared to handle the crisis without
federal assistance. Contamination screening and decontamination of people impacted by the
incident are accomplished locally and are the responsibility of state, tribal, and local governments.
Federal resources are provided at the request of, and in support of, the affected state or states.
HHS, through Emergency Support Function 8 and in consultation with the coordinating agency,
coordinates federal support for population decontamination. HHS also assists and supports state,
tribal, and local governments in performing monitoring for internal contamination and administering
available pharmaceuticals for internal decontamination, as deemed necessary by state health
officials.

Page 6

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

7.0 What Are the Key Considerations in Planning for Population
Monitoring?
Planning for a radiation emergency, particularly a large-scale terrorism incident, involves complicated
issues and processes. The key considerations in planning for population monitoring in the wake of a
radiological terrorism incident are stated below.

7.1 Objectives of Population Monitoring
The objectives of the population monitoring process are the following:





Identify individuals whose health is in immediate danger and who need immediate care,
medical attention (whether radiation-related or not), or decontamination.
Identify people who may need medical treatment for contamination or exposure, further
evaluation, or short-term health monitoring.
Recommend (and to the extent possible, facilitate) practical steps to minimize the risk of
future health consequences (e.g., cancer).
Register potentially affected populations for long-term health monitoring.

With these objectives in mind, this guide may be used to work through the planning process for
population monitoring.

7.2 Identifying and Prioritizing the Affected Population
In the event of a terrorist attack, many
people in the affected area would likely
request an assessment and treatment
from public health authorities, hospitals,
clinics, and private physicians. Other
people who were not exposed or
contaminated may request evaluation to
confirm their condition or seek
reassurance. Every effort should be
made to keep those who do not need
immediate medical attention from
overburdening local and area hospitals.
This may be accomplished by identifying
the time periods and locations where
members of the public could have
received an exposure of concern. This information should then be communicated to members of the
public to help them make informed decisions.
The highest treatment priority is for people who have lifethreatening injuries or who are in need of immediate medical
care, which may or may not be related to the radiation
incident (e.g., heart attack or a pre-existing critical condition).
As will be discussed later, effective public communication is a
key component of the emergency response. In a mass
casualty incident, uninjured people can be encouraged to go
home, self-decontaminate, and then return for monitoring at
designated locations according to a priority schedule.

The highest treatment priority
is for people who have lifethreatening injuries or who are
in need of immediate medical
care.

The triage process should identify and prioritize people for external contamination screening and
identify and prioritize a subset of those individuals for internal contamination screening and medical
follow-up, if needed.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 7

Local and state officials should ensure that the following capabilities are available within the first 24
to 48 hours.








Making radiation dose projections (external irradiation and plume predictions)
Assessing the risk of exposure by time and location
Identifying victims within range, location, and proximity to the incident
Identifying potential acute symptoms (nausea, vomiting, etc.)
Providing radiation detection equipment to detect the evidence of external beta, gamma,
or alpha contamination as applicable, and following up with decontamination
Performing periodic blood tests (CBC with differential white cell count) for direct exposure
assessment if large, whole-body doses are suspected
Collecting urine samples for bioassays if internal contamination is suspected (not a
priority after an IND scenario)

The prioritization scheme to identify individuals for monitoring can be based on the following:





Radiation dose projections, if available (external irradiation and plume predictions)
Specific times and locations where people may have had a higher probability of being
exposed or contaminated
Presentation of clinical symptoms consistent with acute radiation syndrome, especially if
this is correlated with relevant times and locations specified above
Other factors, such as age and pregnancy

7.2.1 Special Populations
Public health authorities and emergency planners should identify and prioritize special populations in
the community that have special needs after a radiation incident. These include the following:














Page 8

Children (Note: Be cognizant of minor children without custodial adults present, e.g.,
school children. Families should remain together.)
Pregnant women
Nursing mothers
Elderly people requiring assistance
Immunocompromised individuals
Disabled persons requiring the use
of wheelchairs or other mobility
aids
Workers
o Emergency responders
o Transient or migrant workers
o Commuters
Homeless people
Institutionalized individuals who
may or may not be able to evacuate
or relocate
Hospital patients
Residents of nursing homes or other institutions
Prison inmates, guards, and workers required to maintain, operate, or secure critical and
essential infrastructure

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Public health authorities and emergency planners should also






determine any cultural or religious factors in the community that would affect the
population monitoring process. For example, changing clothing in a public setting may
present a complication for some people.
identify and develop relationships with organizations that are currently assisting special
populations in or near the community. They may be able to provide assistance.
ensure that communications and educational materials are provided in appropriate
languages and literacy level for the community. People who do not speak English as a
first language could have great difficulty in understanding instructions when under the
stress of a terrorist incident. Consider visuals, universal signage, or videos to
communicate vital information.
determine how pets will be handled and how this will affect population monitoring.

7.3 Population Monitoring (The Initial Hours)
In large metropolitan areas, population density is high during business hours, and tens or hundreds
of thousands of people may be in the immediate vicinity of the incident.9 There may be an
inclination to cordon off the area and contain the population that may be contaminated until they
can all be properly screened and decontaminated. For a variety of reasons, this response is
ineffective. The longer members of the public are kept waiting, the higher their level of anxiety will
be. Long wait times may also increase their potential radiation dose from external sources and the
likelihood of ingesting or inhaling radioactive material.
The highest priority is to care for people who are critically injured. Others can be divided into the
following two groups:


People who self-evacuate. Guidance should be given to this population through multiple
communication methods (television, radio, Internet, and social media) on what actions to
take and how to decontaminate themselves. Explain that, like dirt, most contamination
washes off with soap and water. They should act as if they were going home in clothes
covered with mud or dust and do not want to track it into their homes. Undressing at the
doorway or in the garage is desirable. Provide instructions for them to do the following
tasks:
o Avoid unnecessary hand-to-face contact to minimize potential spread of
contamination (avoid smoking, chewing gum, etc., until after decontamination).
o Remove clothing and place it in a sealed plastic bag.
o Gently blow nose, wipe eyelids, and clean out ears.
o Shower thoroughly with warm (not scalding hot) water and mild soap, allowing the
water to run away from the face.
o Change into clean clothing.
o Wash out tub or shower.
o Tune in to television or radio for further instructions from public health and
emergency response officials.

Guidance should be given to
people who self-evacuate on
what actions to take and how
to decontaminate themselves.

9 This discussion is not applicable to a nuclear detonation scenario.

Please see Appendix C for specific

considerations on population monitoring after a nuclear detonation.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 9



People who stay on the scene. These people need immediate instructions on what to do
while waiting to be helped. These instructions could include the following:
o Avoid touching suspected contaminated surfaces.
o Keep hands away from face (especially mouth) and do not smoke, eat, or drink until
hands and face have been washed.
o Carefully remove outer clothing and place in plastic bags (provided).
o Wash hands and face if water is available, or wipe hands and face with moist towels
or disposable baby wipes (provided).

A quick assessment must be conducted to decide how best to assist this second group in the initial
hours. If the incident happens on a winter afternoon, there may be only a few hours (or less) to
respond and help the affected population get to their homes or to shelters before dark. Traditional
planning for radiation incidents at this stage focuses on thorough monitoring for radioactive
contamination followed by on-scene decontamination using portable or fixed decontamination
showers. Contamination screening and decontamination should be offered, if feasible, in these early
hours. However, this is highly dependent on the number of people waiting and the extent of
available resources. If more timely decontamination can occur by sending people home to shower,
this action is preferred rather than having them wait for on-scene decontamination that could take
significantly longer. If there is a large crowd that exceeds the
local capacity for processing in these early hours, people can
More timely decontamination
be encouraged to go home and self-decontaminate, then
may occur by sending people
return for monitoring on a priority schedule.
home to shower.
A geographic zoning approach may be used (e.g., those
within a certain radius, those in a certain city block) to prioritize the population who will receive
immediate initial monitoring and assistance with decontamination. If possible, a rapid radiation
screening method could be used to isolate those with highest levels of contamination (see
Contamination Screening Criteria below).
Although decontamination by showering or washing with mild soap is the best method of external
decontamination, people can take several practical steps by themselves without any washing to
markedly minimize the levels of external contamination and the likelihood of internal contamination.
For example, plastic garbage bags can be provided to people, along with instructions to carefully
remove their coats or outer garments and bag them (especially if clothing has visible dust). Moist
towels or disposable wipes can be provided so that people can wash their faces and hands while
they wait or as they leave to go home. If possible, clean outer garments can be given to them for
warmth. This method may be preferred to outdoor showering at this stage, especially when
temperatures are cold or the number of people is large.
7.3.1 Contamination Screening Criteria
CDC does not recommend setting a pre-determined, fixed
screening criterion to be applied to all people for all incidents
under all circumstances. State planners and decision makers,
along with state radiation control authorities, should consider a
range of possible circumstances, keeping the following in mind:






Page 10

CDC does not recommend
setting a predetermined,
fixed screening criterion.

Population monitoring objectives described in this guide
Specific radiation detection equipment instrumentation responders will be using (dose
rate meters, beta/gamma portal monitors, and specific type of surface contamination
monitors)
Staffing resources and the size of population expected to be processed
Facilities and resources available for on-the-scene contamination screening and
decontamination
Availability of other resources

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Planning should be done in advance with some room for flexibility. Emergency responders must
have very clear instructions to follow on the basis of the evaluation of the specific local
circumstances. CDC is available to assist in the planning process. A discussion of key
considerations in selecting an external contamination screening criterion and a number of
benchmark screening criteria are described in Appendix D. Furthermore, a discussion of key
considerations in selecting an internal contamination screening criterion is provided in Appendix E.
In addition, if requested after an incident, the Federal Advisory Team for Environment, Food, and
Health can assist in establishing practicable screening criteria based on specific local
circumstances. In some situations, it may be practical to use geographic zoning criteria to prioritize
the population in most urgent need of assistance with decontamination.
7.3.2 Radiation Survey Methodology
In occupational settings, a contamination
screening from head to toe is standard radiation
protection work practice. This is not a
recommended survey methodology for the first
few hours after a mass casualty radiation
emergency since any unnecessary delay can
potentially increase the radiation dose to people
waiting to be surveyed. If a large population
must be screened for contamination, screening
only the head, face, shoulders, and hands is
acceptable because these are the most likely
locations of contamination.
Handheld instruments, such as Geiger-Mueller (GM) pancake survey meters, are suitable for either
detailed or spot surveys because they are portable, versatile, rugged, easy to use, and common in
the radiation protection community. In addition to beta and gamma contamination, GM pancake
probes can also detect alpha contamination although not with the same efficiency.10 Portal
beta/gamma radiation monitors can also be used at this stage, although they are usually limited in
availability and require more skilled operators. Walk-through portal monitors may be best employed
during later stages of monitoring, such as in community reception centers or in entrances to critical
structures, such as hospitals, public buildings, airports, train stations, and bus terminals.
7.3.3 Clothing Services
Planning should include provisions for distributing clothing to people who are asked to remove and
bag their contaminated outer garments before they leave the scene of the incident. This measure
will also help significantly reduce the extent of cross-contamination away from the scene. People
going home are the easiest to clothe, because durability of that clothing is secondary. In such
circumstances, hospital scrubs, paper clothing, sweat suits, and t-shirts, perhaps with blankets for
warmth, can be provided. Planners should make arrangements in advance with large retailers in the
community to provide children’s clothing, shoes (or flip-flops or sandals), or other clothing needs.
People going to shelters need more durable, robust clothing. Communities should include
participating retailers in the local emergency response plans. If possible, emergency purchase
agreements should be negotiated in advance.

10 If it is determined that contamination is primarily an alpha-particle emitter, there are handheld detectors

specifically designed to detect alpha particles. It will take longer, however, to screen each individual.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 11

7.3.4 Transportation Services
It is prudent to plan for providing
transportation services in the first few hours
after an incident for people who have places
to go (e.g., their own homes) but have no
means of transportation to reach them. Crosscontamination of the buses or other vehicles
used for this transportation is a secondary
issue. Vehicles do not have to be
decontaminated between loads of passengers.
They will be decontaminated later, prior to
their return to normal service.
7.3.5 Washing Facilities
As will be described later, it is important to establish facilities for thorough washing at or near public
shelters and community reception centers (CRCs). Many communities have plans for deploying
portable decontamination facilities in the first few hours after a radiation incident. However, in mass
casualty incidents, it may not be possible to process a large number of people quickly enough by
using portable decontamination facilities. As stated earlier, a number of services can be provided in
the first few hours to assist people in reducing their dose and decreasing the likelihood of internal
contamination. These services include the provision of proper instructions and basic supplies, such
as plastic bags for containing their outer garments and moist towels and disposable wipes for
cleaning their faces and hands.
In the first few hours, it may be necessary to
help get the most heavily contaminated
people to washing facilities. The goals at this
stage are to get a person out of contaminated
clothing immediately and get the radioactive
material off the body as soon as possible.
Replacement clothing must be nearby.
People who are able to shower themselves
should use mild soap and warm water. Cold
water or water from hydrants should not be
used unless there are no other options
available and definitive provision is made to
dry and warm each person directly after a
short wash. After showering, people should
be screened again for contamination and, if
necessary, they should take a second shower. If this simple decontamination fails, the person
should be designated for further assessment for possible internal contamination.
Sports arenas and gymnasiums may provide suitable showering facilities. If such facilities are
difficult to locate in the affected area, consider transporting people or using a nearby hotel,
especially if outdoor weather conditions are not favorable. Staff members can escort people to
rooms where showers can be used with minimal impact on the hotel. People may be instructed to
wait in hotel rooms until suitable clothing arrives. Allowing them to use the telephone and television
in the room will assist in keeping them calm.

Page 12

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Note that providing showering facilities and associated staff services in
these first few hours can be done for only a relatively limited number of
people. If the radiation screening criteria is too stringent or the
geographic zoning criteria is set too broadly, a large and unmanageable
number of people will be designated for processing at showering facilities,
defeating the purpose of expeditious decontamination.
At no time should an individual’s identification, jewelry, money, or credit
cards be collected. People can try to wash these things as they wash
themselves, or the items can be bagged. All contaminated clothing
collected before the washing process should be bagged and labeled for
further epidemiological and law enforcement purposes.
7.3.6 Registration
A critical function that should start as early as possible is the registry of the affected and possibly
exposed population. This topic is addressed later in more detail. Initially, the most basic and critical
information to collect from each person is his or her name, address, telephone number, and contact
information. If time permits, other information can be recorded,
including the person’s location at time of the incident and
Registration should start
radiation readings, but this is not essential and should not
as early as possible, but it
become a bottleneck in the registration process. Additional
should not become a
information can be collected later as people are processed to
send home or when they report to community reception centers
bottleneck.
(CRCs). This registry information will be used to contact
individuals for follow-up activities, if needed.
7.3.7 Collection of Clinical Samples
Typically, it is not practical for local or state responders to collect bioassay samples in the first few
hours after an incident. Bioassay samples, however, provide a powerful diagnostic tool for
assessment of internal contamination and, in cases where relatively high radiation doses are
expected, for detection of acute radiation syndrome. In the case of a RDD incident, the most useful
bioassay for dose estimation is a urine sample. In the IND case, a blood sample can be used to help
estimate the dose received from external radiation exposure.
Local hospitals or public health laboratories should be
prepared to analyze blood samples (CBC with differential white
cell count) to assess for acute radiation syndrome, if
warranted.
Federal resources may be able to assist in the collection and
analysis of urine bioassays for assessing internal
contamination from a RDD, but these resources will not be
available in the first few hours. Federal assets may also be
available to analyze blood samples from an IND incident using
cytogenetic dosimetry to more accurately assess radiation
dose. However, this laboratory capacity is very limited and it
takes 3-4 days to complete the analysis. Samples should be
prioritized for cytogenetic analysis on a case-by-case basis.
Planners should keep in mind that the limited capacity to
perform cytogenetic dosimetry makes this technique practical
only for a limited number of exposed people in a relatively
small incident. After an IND incident, for example, it is not
practical to use this technique for estimating radiation dose for
large numbers of exposed people.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 13

7.3.8 Worker Protection
Population monitoring should preferably take place at a location that is not contaminated or is
minimally impacted by contamination, and where no known airborne or respiratory hazards exist.
Nevertheless, many people reporting to be screened could be contaminated with radioactive
material on their clothes or bodies, presenting a possibility of cross-contamination and a potential
inhalation hazard to the staff. Universal medical precautions, including gown, gloves, face mask,
safety glasses, and appropriate respiratory protection (as determined by the safety officer) will
provide adequate protection. The safety officer will evaluate the need for, and issue as appropriate,
personal dosimetry devices and other personal protective equipment to the staff. Staff should try to
minimize physical contact with people, and gloves should be changed or checked frequently for
contamination.

7.4 Population Monitoring (Day 2 and Beyond)
On the day after the incident, there still may be only a limited number of federal responders at the
site. As federal teams arrive to assist, many of the services described in this section can be
augmented, but the initial setup and conduct of these operations will rely on local, tribal, or state
resources. Under certain scenarios (e.g., an IND detonation in another city resulting in a large
displaced population), there may not be any immediate federal assistance for 48 to 72 hours or
longer, and local responding officials need to include such scenarios in their planning.
7.4.1 Setting Up Community Reception Centers
A radiation incident that impacts a large population will require planners to establish one or more
community reception centers (CRCs), to assess people for exposure, contamination, and the need for
decontamination or medical follow-up. Some CRCs should be established at or near shelters.
The CRC model developed by CDC and ORAU presented in Appendix F breaks down the CRC process
into the following stations:









Initial Sorting
First Aid
Contamination Screening
Wash
Pet Services (for pet-friendly CRCs)
Registration
Radiation Dose Assessment
Discharge

CRC staff should be able to do the following:





Support contamination detection through beta/gamma portal monitors, if appropriate.
Support general contamination screening via handheld instruments.
Field questions and address concerns.
Provide information and give instructions, as applicable.

Appendix G describes tools available for CRC training and planning.

Page 14

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Facilities or sites in the community being considered for use as CRCs should be assessed on the
following characteristics:








Size
Location
Adequate restroom facilities
Shower (decontamination) rooms or
facilities
Accommodations for people with
disabilities
Environmental control (against
excessive heat or cold)
Adequate access and exit control
(in case of an emergency
evacuation)

An all-weather facility designed for crowds, such as a covered sports arena or convention center,
would be ideal, but depending on the circumstances and weather, a nearby park or large parking lot
would also suffice. Many jurisdictions have identified high schools as potential CRC sites because
school gymnasiums provide adequate space to conduct contamination screening and locker rooms
provide indoor shower facilities to conduct decontamination. Agreements should be established in
advance with facility or site owners and operators.
It is important to note that planning for CRC operations does not involve much more than what is
most likely already included in existing public health emergency response plans. Many communities
have emergency plans to establish alternate care sites (ACS) or neighborhood emergency help
centers (NEHC) to provide health and medical services to those who may need assistance or medical
care but do not need hospitalization (likely the majority of the affected population).11 These are
usually well-known locations within the community, such as the area high schools. Many
communities also have plans to use these facilities as points of dispensing (PODs) for medical
supplies from the Strategic National Stockpile in case of pandemic flu, for example, or other
biological threats.12

The same facilities used for
ACSs, NEHCs, and PODs can
be used for CRCs with the
addition of radiation detection
equipment and radiation
protection personnel.

Because these other public health response operations have
very similar functions and staffing requirements, the same
facilities used for ACSs, NEHCs, and PODs can be used for
CRCs with the addition of radiation detection equipment and
radiation protection personnel. Radiation protection
personnel in the CRC will conduct contamination screening,
evaluate the results, and assist with decontamination. A
suggested listing of supplies, resources, and staffing needs for
CRCs is provided in Appendix H. Many of these may already
be part of plans to set up PODs, NEHCs, or ACSs.

The CRC should have sufficient staff, both technical and nontechnical, to manage the center for up
to several days or weeks. A technical staff that is competent in the use of radiation detection
equipment must be available for contamination screening. Additional staff members will be needed
to process people and help with decontamination. Additionally, CRCs will likely need one or more

11 Appendix B in Altered Standards of Care in Mass Casualty Events, Agency for Healthcare Research and

Quality (AHRQ), U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, April 2005; Expanding Local Healthcare
Structure in a Mass Casualty Terrorism Incident, U.S. Department of Defense, June 2002; A Mass Casualty
Care Strategy for Biological Terrorism Incidents, U.S. Department of Defense, May 2001.
12 For an example, see the Philadelphia Department of Public Health POD Manual available at

http://www.naccho.org/toolbox/_toolbox/POD%20operations%20manual_1.pdf.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 15

clinicians to assess and refer people who need medical follow-up or to administer pharmaceutical
countermeasures. As federal personnel and assets arrive, they can be employed at CRCs to provide
relief for staff or the expansion of services.
As with PODs, NEHCs, or ACSs, there must be a plan to set up a registry area within the CRC to do
the following:







Manage the registration process and provide support to volunteers and data collectors.
Register and log in those who arrive.
Issue wristbands or other identification materials.
Control crowds.
Collect health information related to the incident and enter it into a computer database.
Distribute information sheets.

As members of the public are released from CRCs, each person should be given discharge
instructions written in clear, easy-to-understand language. It should tell people that the health
department may need to contact them to conduct further monitoring or an additional medical
evaluation. The instruction sheets should also provide the following: (1) basic information about
radiation and its effects on human health; (2) recommended actions to be taken by the public to
safeguard their health; and (3) points of contact for news and information. CDC recommends
reviewing this information periodically to ensure its accuracy because these contacts may change.
Contact information for people discharged from CRCs should be maintained in a database common
to all service centers. This database can be used for potential follow-up activities. Physicians can
also use the database to access information about their patients who have gone to a CRC for
evaluation. Health care providers should receive training on managing victims of radiation exposure
and contamination.
In addition, public health and emergency preparedness personnel
should plan to augment preexisting behavioral health and mental health
Be prepared to
services. Such services will be in demand both by people acutely
provide behavioral
affected by the radiation incident as well as by members of the public
and mental health
with chronic, long-term mental health needs. The need for such
services at the CRC.
services will increase following a radiation incident, whether or not it
involves mass casualties.
7.4.2 Practical Considerations for Community Reception Center Operations
The primary purpose of the CRC is to identify people who may need immediate assistance—
decontamination and the use of washing facilities, medical attention, or other special assistance.
These services must be provided expeditiously for large numbers of people. Many people who come
to the CRC will not be contaminated, but nevertheless are concerned. Effective communication
through the news media and easily understood schedules that stagger the times people report to
CRCs can help ensure the timely provision of services to those who really need them. It is better for
people who may not need services to come to CRCs rather than go to nearby hospital emergency
departments that could be already overwhelmed.
If the local media are operational, use them to educate the public on how to control contamination
and self-decontaminate at home before they go to the CRCs. Removal of clothing can eliminate
most of the external contamination on a person, and washing can remove most of the residual
contamination.
Communicating with people about the process and goals of population monitoring will be important
in managing the monitoring process. This critical function can be performed by greeters who can
answer quick questions, direct people to monitoring areas, and try to identify those needing special
attention. Having an adequate number of greeters is important for crowd control because it helps
people understand what is happening and how their needs will be addressed quickly. Greeters who
speak additional languages that are common in the local area are extremely helpful.

Page 16

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Families should not
be separated.

The stations should be set up to optimize flow through the CRC. CRC
staff should consider providing services while people wait in line, such as
collecting information for entry into a registration system. Even if it takes
a long time for everyone to get through the screening and
decontamination stations, crowd control will be significantly improved if
staff make productive use of people’s time in line.

As lines form, one or more staff members with radiation detection equipment should walk the line
looking for people who







are highly contaminated.
have small children.
might have medical problems.
might be pregnant.
do not speak or understand English.
have cultural or religious considerations.

This initial screening begins a triage system intended to identify people in need of priority care or
services. Having two staff members per line would be ideal for this initial screening, one
concentrating on radiation readings (using headphones with external speaker off) and the other
observing and interacting with people in line. It is important to remember that family members
should not be separated.
Those needing medical assistance should be taken to the First Aid Station immediately. It may be
prudent to divide the others into two groups: (1) those who have performed self-decontamination at
home (showered and changed clothes), and (2) those who have not showered or changed clothes.
Appendix F contains more detailed information about the CRC process.
7.4.3 Pets
The Pet Evacuation and Transportation (PETS) Act of 2006 requires that state and local emergency
plans address the needs of people with household pets or service animals.13 Therefore, as
resources permit, animal issues should be managed as an element of protecting public health and
safety.
Although it may be difficult to wash animals at a CRC, the concern with contamination of the facility
and its occupants is significant, and owners should be apprised of options to clean their pets or
service animals. Cross-contamination of the owner and contamination of those in the CRC are of
greater concern than the dose to the animal. Pet owners should be encouraged to wash their own
pets, when able to do so, unless disaster response teams are specially trained and available to care
for animals. People with service animals may need assistance caring for their animals.
7.4.4 Scaling for Size of Incident
The size of incident is a major consideration in planning for population monitoring. Population
monitoring plans should be scalable, up or down, based on the number of people affected. If dozens
of people need to be surveyed and decontaminated, responders can probably provide very thorough
services at the scene. However, if thousands of people are affected, plans will have to be modified
so that everyone can be processed quickly and safely.

13 Public Law 109-138, October 6, 2006.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 17

7.4.5 Screening for External Contamination and Conducting Decontamination
As mentioned previously, decontamination may be
performed at various stages in the population monitoring
process. Immediate decontamination may be necessary to
reduce an individual’s exposure to radiation from radioactive
contamination and to help control cross-contamination at
the scene.

If resources allow, consider using
more stringent contamination
screening criteria.

The first step in external contamination screening is to check people for radioactive contamination
on their bodies and clothing. Note that at this stage, if adequate decontamination resources allow,
more stringent contamination screening criteria than those used in the early hours after the incident
may be considered. For external contamination screening, responders should verify that appropriate
instruments (portal monitors or handheld meters) are available14 and that the instruments are
working properly. Be sure to check for both beta-gamma radiation and (if suspected) alpha
radiation, and document the results. Refer uncontaminated people to the Registration Station and
contaminated people to the Wash (decontamination) Station.
Ensure that materials needed for external decontamination
are available, and route lines in such a way that people in
need of decontamination do not come in contact with
people who have already washed.
Plans should assume that most people will be able to selfdecontaminate, but be prepared to provide assistance to
those who cannot, such as people with disabilities.
Determine if parents can assist their children with washing.
Direct people with wounds to the First Aid Station for
special handling, and institute a referral plan for transfer to
hospitals and other health care settings. For people who
do not have wounds, direct them to do the following:






Wash with warm water and mild soap.
Scrub gently with a cloth, sponge, or soft brush.
When showering, begin with the head and
proceed to the feet.
Keep soap and water out of eyes, nose, and
mouth.
Avoid causing mechanical, chemical, or thermal
damage to skin.

After decontamination, screen each person again. If needed, ask them to wash again. People who
are still contaminated after the second washing may be referred to the Radiation Dose Assessment
Station. Collect basic demographic information, health history,
and exposure history. Some people may decide to leave the CRC
Be prepared to provide
without being decontaminated. CRC staff should explain why
assistance with
decontamination is important and advise these people to
decontamination for
decontaminate themselves as soon as possible when they reach
people with special needs.
their destination.

14 These instruments are for screening people.

You should also consider area-monitoring devices at CRCs to
assess and monitor background radiation levels. Consult with your state’s radiation control program. A list of
state radiation control program directors is available at www.crcpd.org/Map/default.aspx.

Page 18

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

7.4.6 Screening for Internal Contamination and Conducting Decontamination
Internal contamination is when radioactive material
enters the body through ingestion, inhalation, or
through cuts or wounds. Having accurate
information about the levels of internal
contamination is important in deciding whether
medical intervention is warranted. The methods
and equipment needed for assessing internal
contamination are more advanced than the
equipment required to conduct external
contamination screening. Collectively, procedures
to screen for internal contamination are referred to
as bioassays. In general, these bioassays require
off-site analysis by a clinically certified radiological
laboratory. People should be advised that it may be
some time before results are available.
For gamma-emitting radionuclides, external
contamination screening can provide some
indication of the extent of internal contamination.
Furthermore, factors such as physical location
during the incident or the extent of external
contamination on the body can be additional indicators of the likelihood and degree of internal
contamination. However, laboratory results can provide definitive information, especially in the case
of alpha-emitting radionuclides. Appendix E provides a discussion on screening criteria for internal
contamination.
Identify in advance personnel and resources necessary for these evaluations. These can include
whole-body counters and lung counters (for in-vivo analysis), and the ability to perform radiochemical
analysis of urine. Other needed resources are sample collection kits, appropriate administrative
forms, and chain-of-custody documentation.
When a person is internally contaminated, depending on the type of radioactive material, certain
medications can be administered to speed up the rate at which the radioactive material is eliminated
from the body. Internal decontamination is a medical procedure and should only be performed at
the order of, and under the guidance of, a licensed physician.
The Strategic National Stockpile (SNS) can provide pharmaceuticals to states for this purpose (see
Appendix I). State health officers can contact CDC to discuss procedures and receive more
information about the SNS. In addition, the following resources can provide information about
treatments for internal contamination.






The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
www.fda.gov/Drugs/EmergencyPreparedness/BioterrorismandDrugPreparedness/ucm0
63807.htm
Radiation Emergency Assistance Center/Training Site (REAC/TS)
http://orise.orau.gov/reacts/resources/package-inserts.aspx
Radiation Emergency Medical Management (REMM) – Guidance on Diagnosis and
Treatment for Healthcare Providers
www.remm.nlm.gov
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/countermeasures.asp
National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurement (NCRP) Report 165,
Management of Persons Accidentally Contaminated with Radionuclides
www.ncrppublications.org/Reports/165

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 19

7.5 Dose Assessment and Laboratory Capabilities
For medical management of patients, it is helpful to assess the total radiation dose to each
individual. The total dose a person receives is made up of two components: the internal dose from
radioactive material inside the body and the external dose from exposure to external sources of
radiation. There are specific laboratory analyses that can help with these assessments.
A prioritization scheme for
analysis of bioassay samples
will be necessary.

Analysis of radioactivity in urine can establish amounts of
radioactive material in the body. Although the analysis can be
performed fairly rapidly, it will take some time for this
information to be available for everyone in the affected and
potentially affected populations. Therefore, some prioritization
scheme for analysis of samples will be necessary (see
Appendix E).

Analysis of chromosomal aberrations (cytogenetic analysis) can estimate the external radiation dose
to the individual; however, these results will not be immediately available. Furthermore, the capacity
to perform cytogenetic analyses is limited and will not meet the demand in an incident where large
numbers of people are exposed (such as a nuclear detonation incident). Performing a complete
blood count with differential (standard and routine analysis in local clinics and hospitals) and noting
the time delay to the onset of nausea can provide estimates of the range of acute radiation doses.
This information can be used to assist in medical management of patients.15
Issues that should be addressed in planning for laboratory analysis include, but are not limited, to
the following:









Analytical capability
Sample prioritization and triage
Turnaround time
Sample throughput
Sample volume
Sample storage capacity
Confidentiality assurance
Protocols for reporting analytical result

In the planning process, public health laboratory directors should assess their roles and capabilities
following a radiation emergency. The following resources can provide additional information to
assist in laboratory planning.



For information about analysis of radioactive contamination in urine, contact CDC’s
Environmental Health Laboratory: http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/dls
For information on cytogenetic analysis of blood samples, contact REAC/TS Cytogenetic
Biodosimetry Laboratory: http://orise.orau.gov/reacts/cytogenetics-lab.htm

15 More information on medical management is available at

http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/healthandsafety.asp and the Radiation Emergency Medical Management
(REMM) website www.remm.nlm.gov/.

Page 20

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

7.6 Psychosocial Issues
Psychosocial issues will present significant
challenges to public health and medical
practitioners both during and after a radiation
emergency. The psychosocial consequences of
radiation emergencies are unique and serious,
and in many ways they can be even greater and
longer-lasting than the physical or economic
consequences. Public health and medical
systems could be overwhelmed by people seeking
assessment and care. Many jurisdictions
recognize that preparing to deal with psychosocial
issues is critically important for efficiently
managing and monitoring the affected population
and engaging in other response efforts. Planners should work with behavioral health and mental
health specialists to include them in preparedness planning and response.
Psychological first aid is a way to help reduce the initial distress caused by traumatic events.
Responders who interact with the public can benefit from training in psychological first aid.16
Responders should anticipate normal stress reactions and promote the following principles of
psychological first aid.






Safety: provide repeated, simple, and accurate information on how to meet basic needs.
This may be especially important for CRC staff wearing personal protective equipment
that hinders communications (such as masks).
Calm: speak calmly and be compassionate and friendly.
Connectedness: keep families together.
Self-efficacy: give practical suggestions to help empower people.
Help: direct people to available services.

If possible, include behavioral health or mental health professionals on staff at each CRC. During
the planning process, establish a contact list of credentialed personnel who could provide these
services.
Plans should also include providing counseling for CRC staff and responders. Adequate rotation of
staff members to reduce physical and emotional fatigue will be essential.

16 For an example of such training, see CDC’s Psychological First Aid in Radiation Disasters, available at

http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/resourcelibrary/all.asp.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 21

7.7 Registry
State and local agencies should establish a
registry as early as possible after a radiation
incident. This registry will be used to contact
people who require short-term medical follow-up
or long-term health monitoring. The long-term
monitoring process involves observing and
recording any health effects that could be related
to radiation exposure, including effects on
subsequent generations. Extensive resources will
be required, and CDC and the Agency for Toxic
Substances and Disease Registry (ATSDR) will
provide assistance in establishing and maintaining
this registry.
The registry should include information from the following:



All members of the public who were potentially contaminated or exposed
All first responders, public health workers, and hospital staff who were potentially
contaminated or exposed or who responded to a radiation incident within the jurisdiction

It is recommended that unique identifiers be assigned to each individual as people present
themselves to the CRC and are registered. Initially gather basic information such as name, address,
telephone number, other contact information, date of birth, and sex. If possible, copying a driver’s
license or other form of identification with current information can expedite the registry process. It
may be helpful to include the individual’s status as the following:





A paid responder
A volunteer responder at the scene
A person affected at the scene of the incident
A person who heard a public announcement and believes he or she fits the category for
monitoring

If possible, include spatial and temporal information related to the incident. Ask questions such as,
“Where were you when the incident occurred? How close were you to the incident location? How
long were you there?”
Also consider categorizing (triaging) people radiologically:






External contamination
Internal contamination
External exposure only
Neither contaminated or exposed
Unknown

Plans should address confidentiality and potential liability issues associated with registering and
collecting data on all persons who come to a processing center, even if they were not exposed to
radiation or contaminated with radioactive material. The public should be informed that inclusion in
the registry does not imply any form of future compensation. Determine, in advance, who will have
access to the registry database and how it will be archived.

Page 22

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

ATSDR has developed a Rapid Response Registry to assist state and local personnel with
epidemiological investigations.17 Other examples of registry and epidemiological tracking forms are
available from the National Alliance for Radiation Readiness (NARR)18 or as part of the Virtual
Community Reception Center (vCRC)19 training program.

7.8 Radiation Dose Reconstruction
Radiation dose reconstruction is a scientific study that estimates radiation doses to people after a
radiation incident. Radiation dose reconstruction studies typically focus on determining who (if
anyone) may be at a greater risk for cancer. In this context, dose reconstruction to estimate cancer
risk is not an emergency response activity. Dose reconstruction will, however, use information that
was collected during the emergency response.
Radiation dose reconstruction studies determine external dose rates and radionuclide
concentrations at various times and locations, how people were exposed to radiation, and the
amount of radioactive material that was taken into their bodies. HHS/CDC will provide technical
support and assistance to state and local authorities to conduct dose reconstruction studies, using
sophisticated computer models. Local public health agencies will provide public information and
collect data to be used in the dose reconstruction.

7.9 Training
Training for the public health and emergency response
communities is essential in building a population monitoring
capability. Training should focus on increasing the
understanding of radiation and demystifying radiation and its
effects. In addition, it should prepare public health workers
to focus on roles and responsibilities, resource identification,
proper use of radiation detection equipment, clinical sample
collection, and laboratory methods and procedures.
Training should be provided to promote awareness of
population monitoring among the following:







First responders
Elected officials and community stakeholders
Public information and communication
specialists
Clinicians, health practitioners, and hospital staff
Journalists and radio and television broadcasters
Response volunteer organizations, such as the American Red Cross and the Medical
Reserve Corps

Training should be interactive and affordable. Use drills and exercises to test health preparedness
plans; ensure that all entities that will be involved in the response (from both the emergency
response and the health care/hospital worker communities) are involved. Existing training

17 ATSDR Rapid Response Registry form and training CD are available at www.atsdr.cdc.gov/rapidresponse/.
18 The NARR is an interagency collaboration among key stakeholders in public health preparedness, radiation

response, and emergency management that maintains a clearing house of documents and resources used in
radiation emergency planning and exercises (www.radiationready.org).
19 vCRC is an interactive training program developed by CDC and ORAU that allows users to explore a virtual

CRC and access templates for forms, job action sheets, and other planning materials
(http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/crc/vcrc.asp).

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 23

resources, such as satellite broadcasts, webcasts, videos, and print materials, are available on many
federal and state websites; these materials can be adapted for the community. Partner with other
agencies and organizations to reduce the cost of training.
Awareness level training topics should address the following:







Types of radiation hazards
Principles of radioactivity and radiation safety
Contamination control
Minimizing individual exposure
Principles of dose reconstruction
Principles of registry management

Training for public health personnel should cover these activities:









Determining the location of CRCs based on the amount of space needed, the anticipated
magnitude of the radiation incident, and the population and special needs of the
community
Establishing crowd management operations, including the development of triage
procedures and the distribution of information during population monitoring
Using on-site equipment to monitor external contamination
Identifying and handling special population needs
Recognizing psychological trauma and practicing psychological first aid
Identifying the process and procedures for requesting federal support
Establishing and maintaining contacts with federal agencies for equipment, personnel,
and expertise
Working effectively with partner agencies (e.g., DHS/FEMA, HHS/CDC, HHS/FDA, DOE,
EPA, NRC, USDA, and the American Red Cross)

Medical personnel should be trained on the following:






Emergency and first aid procedures for radiation victims
Diagnosis of acute radiation health effects
Assessment of external and internal radiation exposure
Prompt triage and management of contaminated patients
Psychological features and dynamics of radiation incidents

7.10 Communications
Communicating about radiation and related emergency issues is extremely challenging. Radiation is
unfamiliar to and not well understood by most people. Effective communication in radiation
emergencies can decrease illness, injury, and death; facilitate response and recovery efforts; avoid
misallocation of limited resources; reduce rumors; and minimize medically unnecessary self-referrals
to hospitals and other critical facilities.
Information needs will primarily revolve around questions to help determine the risk, as well as
questions on protective actions to reduce risk. Such questions could include the following:







Am I in danger from the radiation?
Am I radioactive?
Am I still carrying around radioactive material on my body? Skin? Clothes? How do I get
it off? What symptoms should I expect? Is my condition contagious? Is it curable?
Did I eat or breathe in radioactive material? Is it inside my body now? If so, how long will
the material stay in my body? Should I be medically treated?
Were my children exposed? Were my pets exposed?
I’m pregnant – will my baby be all right?

Page 24

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.



For any levels or amounts of exposure, even miniscule, people will want to know what health effects
they may have in the future. The communication strategy should meet people’s information needs,
bridge the gap between technical information and risk perception, and promote responsible public
actions.
Effective and credible communication strategies are needed to explain that most radiation
exposures will not result in any measurable health effects. The U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency has prepared a useful booklet on this subject.20 In addition, research conducted by the CDC
has identified best practices in communication in radiation emergencies, which include the following:












Create messages that address public concerns.
Provide prioritized instructions and directions.
Tailor messages by time post-incident.
Tailor messages by distance from the incident.
Tailor messages by delivery method (television, radio, Internet, social media, etc.).
Create messages that are urgent and serious in tone, yet provide a sense of hope.
Avoid using messages that contain perceived contradictions.
Use plain, non-technical language.
Make messages concise.
Avoid or define unfamiliar and technical terms and phrases.
Repeat messages as appropriate.

In a radiation emergency, people will seek information using multiple communication channels.
Providing a consistent message through television, radio, websites, and social media, along with any
other public information methods, will maximize message efficiency and efficacy.
Communication and public information staff should establish a network of qualified public health
media contacts, specifically those with radiation expertise. Key public health spokespeople should
be identified and trained in advance for media announcements or interviews, and plans to
communicate with special populations should be developed.
Ensure that the public health department is aware of procedures for contacting community and civic
organizations, local government and corporate officials, and appropriate federal agencies. Local
government and corporate officials need to be aware of their roles in the overall response plan,
ideally through participation in training, drills, and exercises.

8.0 Additional Information About This Guide
For more information about population monitoring, this guide, or the public health role in radiation
emergency preparedness, please contact the Radiation Studies Branch at CDC via e-mail at
rsbinfo@cdc.gov.
Other sources of information about radiation emergency preparedness can be found in Appendix J.
In a public health emergency, contact the CDC Director’s Emergency Operation Center, 24 hours a
day at 770-488-7100.

20 U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Communicating Radiation Risks, EPA-402-F-07-008, September

2007. www.epa.gov/radiation/pubs.html To request a PDF or printed copy of this document, please e-mail
radiation.information@epa.gov or call the U.S. EPA’s Radiation Protection Division at 202-343-9290.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page 25

APPENDIX A: ACRONYMS

Appendix A
Acronyms
ACS

Alternate care site

AHRQ

Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality

ALI

Annual limit on intake

ARC

American Red Cross

ARS

Acute radiation syndrome

ATSDR

Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry

CBC

Complete blood count

CDC

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention

CRC

Community reception center

CRCPD

Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors, Inc.

CRI

Cutaneous radiation injury

CSF

Colony stimulating factor

DHS

U.S. Department of Homeland Security

DOE

U.S. Department of Energy

DOE/NNSA

U.S. Department of Energy/National Nuclear Security Administration

DTPA

Diethylenetriamine pentaacetate

EPA

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency

FDA

U.S. Food and Drug Administration

FEMA

Federal Emergency Management Agency

GM

Geiger-Mueller

HHS

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services

IAEA

International Atomic Energy Agency

ICRP

International Commission on Radiological Protection

IND

Improvised nuclear device

MRC

Medical Reserve Corps

NCRP

National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements

NEHC

Neighborhood emergency help center

NRC

U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission

ORAU

Oak Ridge Associated Universities

ORISE

Oak Ridge Institute for Science and Education

POD

Point of dispensing

RDD

Radiological dispersal device

REAC/TS

Radiation Emergency Assistance Center/Training Site

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Page A-1

RED

Radiation exposure device

REMM

Radiation Emergency Medical Management

RRVC

Radiation Response Volunteer Corps

SNS

Strategic National Stockpile

USDA

U.S. Department of Agriculture

vCRC

Virtual Community Reception Center

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Page A-2

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

APPENDIX B: GLOSSARY

Appendix B
Glossary
Absorbed dose: The amount of energy deposited by ionizing radiation in a unit mass of tissue is
called radiation absorbed dose. It is expressed in units of joule per kilogram (J/kg), which is given
the special name gray (Gy). The conventional unit (or non-SI unit) of absorbed dose is the rad. 1 Gy =
100 rad, 1 rad = 0.01 Gy. For more information, see CDC Primer on Radiation Measurement:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/glossary.asp#primer
Activity (radioactivity): The amount of radioactive material expressed as the number of atoms
breaking down per second measured in units called becquerels or curies.
Acute radiation syndrome (ARS): A serious illness caused by receiving a large dose of radiation
energy that penetrates the body within a short time (usually minutes). The first symptoms include
nausea, vomiting, and, in severe cases, diarrhea starting within minutes to days after the exposure
and lasting for minutes to several days. These symptoms may come and go and, depending on the
dose of radiation, may fully resolve for variable periods of time. ARS victims then become sick again
with loss of appetite, fatigue, fever, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, and possibly seizures and coma.
This seriously ill stage may last from a few hours to several months.
Clinically, ARS is very difficult to diagnose in the absence of other data or information from the
incident scene because symptoms within the first few hours after high dose radiation exposure are
similar to those associated with commonly occurring viral or bacterial illnesses or even high levels of
stress. Proper diagnosis of exposure to ionizing radiation (not contamination) and an estimate of the
total dose can only be achieved by analysis of the complete blood count (CBC), chromosome
aberration cytogenetic biodosimetry, and consultation with radiation experts. For more information,
see:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/ars.asp
Alpha particle: One of the primary forms of ionizing radiation, the others being beta particles, gamma
rays, x-rays, and neutrons. Alpha particles can be stopped by a thin layer of light material, such as a
sheet of paper, and cannot penetrate the outer, dead layer of skin. Therefore, they do not pose a
hazard as long as they are outside the body. Protection from this radiation is directed at preventing,
or at least minimizing, inhalation or ingestion of the radioactive material.
Alpha particles are difficult to detect because they penetrate only a few inches in air, and most
general purpose detection instruments are poorly suited or not usable for detecting alpha particles.
If beta or gamma radiation is detected at an incident scene, instruments should be brought in as
quickly as possible to determine whether or not alpha-emitting radioisotopes are also present.
Annual limit on intake (ALI): The derived limit for the amount of radioactive material taken into the
body of an adult worker by inhalation or ingestion in a year. ALI is the amount of intake that would
result in a committed effective dose equivalent of 0.05 sievert (5 rem) or a committed dose
equivalent of 0.5 sievert (50 rem) to any individual organ or tissue. The unit of ALI is the becquerel
(Bq) or the conventional unit, curie (Ci).
Background radiation: This is the radiation that the population is naturally and continually exposed to
from natural sources. It consists of radiation from natural sources of radionuclides such as those
found in soil, rocks, air, human bodies, and food, as well cosmic radiation originating in outer space.
Becquerel (Bq): The international unit describing an amount of radioactivity. One Bq is the amount
of a radioactive material that will undergo one decay (disintegration) per second (dps), a very small
rate. Industrial sources of radioactivity are normally described in terms of giga-becquerels (GBq), or
one billion Bq. The conventional unit for radioactivity is the curie (Ci). 1 Bq = 2.7 x 10-11 Ci. See
Curie.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page B-1

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Beta particles: One of the primary forms of ionizing radiation, the others being alpha particles,
gamma rays, x-rays, and neutrons. They travel only a few feet in air and can be stopped by a thin
sheet of aluminum. However, beta particles of sufficient energy can penetrate the dead skin layer
and, if present in large amounts for sufficiently long periods of time, cause burns to the skin and to
the eyes. Protection from this radiation is directed at washing the skin with mild soap and water and
preventing, or at least minimizing, inhalation or ingestion of the radioactive material.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G

Beta particles are easier to detect than alpha particles. While most general purpose detection
instruments can detect beta particles, the instrument must be within a few yards of a sizeable
source. Fortunately, the vast majority of beta-emitting radioisotopes also release high-energy
gamma rays that can be detected at distances of tens of yards.
When radiation is detected at an incident scene, proper instruments should be brought in as quickly
as possible to determine whether pure beta-emitting radioisotopes are present or not, followed in
turn by alpha monitoring equipment.
Bioassay (radiobioassay): An assessment of radioactive materials that may be present inside a
person’s body through analysis of the radioactivity in a person’s excreta (primarily urine), known as
indirect bioassay, or by detection methods to monitor the gamma radiation emitted from the body,
known as direct bioassay.
Biological half-life: Once an amount of radioactive material has been taken into the body, this is the
time it takes for one half of that amount to be expelled from the body by natural metabolic
processes, not counting radioactive decay.
Contamination (radioactive): The deposit of radioactive material on the surfaces of structures, areas,
objects, or people (where it may be external or internal). External contamination occurs when
radioactive material is outside of the body, such as on a person’s skin. Internal contamination
occurs when radioactive material is taken into the body through breathing, eating, or drinking. For
more information, see:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/contamination.asp

H

Curie (Ci): The conventional unit describing an amount of radioactivity. The international unit for
radioactivity is the becquerel (Bq). 1 Ci = 3.7 x 1010 Bq. See Becquerel.

I

Cutaneous radiation injury (CRI): The complex syndrome resulting from significant skin exposure to
radiation. The immediate effects can be reddening and swelling of the exposed area (like a severe
burn), blisters, ulcers on the skin, hair loss, and severe pain. Very large doses can result in
permanent hair loss, scarring, altered skin color, deterioration of the affected body part, and death of
the affected tissue (requiring surgery). For more information, see:

J

http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/cri.asp
Decontamination: Removal of radioactive materials from people, materials, surfaces, food, or water.
For people, external decontamination is done by removing the clothing and washing the hair and
skin. Internal decontamination is a medical procedure and should be performed at the order and
under the guidance of a licensed physician.
Decay, radioactive: Disintegration of the nucleus of an unstable atom by the release of radiation.
Deterministic effects (non-stochastic effects): Health effects that can be related directly to the
radiation dose received (e.g., skin burn). The severity increases as the dose increases. A
deterministic effect typically has a threshold below which the effect will not occur. See also
stochastic effects.
Dirty bomb: A device designed to spread radioactive material by conventional explosives when the
bomb explodes. A dirty bomb kills or injures people through the initial blast of the conventional
explosive and spreads radioactive contamination over a possibly large area—hence the term “dirty.”
Such bombs could be miniature devices or large truck bombs. A dirty bomb is much simpler to make
than a nuclear weapon. See discussion on radiological dispersal device (RDD) in the text.

Page B-2

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Dose rate meters: Instruments that measure the radiation dose delivered per unit of time.
Dose reconstruction: A scientific study that estimates doses to people from releases of radioactivity
or other pollutants. The reconstruction is done by determining how much material was released,
how people came in contact with it, and the amount absorbed by their bodies.
Dosimetry: Assessment (by measurement or calculation) of radiation dose.
Effective half-life: The time required for the amount of a radionuclide deposited in a living organism
to be diminished by 50% as a result of the combined action of radioactive decay and biologic
elimination. See also biological half-life, radioactive half-life.

A

Exposure (irradiation): This occurs when radiation energy penetrates the body. Exposure to very
large doses of radiation may cause death within a few days or months. Exposure to lower doses of
radiation may lead to an increased risk of developing cancer or other adverse health effects later in
life. Compare with contamination. For more information, see:

B

http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/contamination.asp

C

Fallout, nuclear: The descent of radioactive debris from the atmosphere to ground level following a
nuclear explosion. For more information, see:
www.cdc.gov/nceh/radiation/fallout/RF-GWT_home.htm
Gamma rays: One of the primary ionizing radiations, the others being alpha particles, beta particles,
x-rays, and neutrons. Gamma rays are highly penetrating (up to tens of yards in air) and pose an
external radiation exposure hazard. Gamma rays also penetrate tissue farther than do beta or alpha
particles. Gamma rays are relatively easy to detect with commonly available radiation detection
instruments.

D
E
F

Geiger-Mueller (GM) survey meter: Also called Geiger counters, these survey meters are the most
widely recognized and commonly used portable radiation detection instruments. The pancake GM
detector can detect gamma, beta, and, to a limited extent, alpha contamination.

G

Genetic effects: Hereditary effects (mutations) that can be passed on through reproduction because
of changes in sperm or ova. See also teratogenic effects, somatic effects.

H

Gray (Gy): A unit of measurement for absorbed dose. It measures the amount of energy absorbed in
a material. The unit Gy can be used for any type of radiation, but it does not describe the biological
effects of the different radiations. The conventional unit of absorbed dose is the rad. 1 Gy = 0.01
rad. For more information, see:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/glossary.asp#primer
Half-life (radioactive): The time it takes for any amount of radioactive material to decay (and reduce)
to half of its original amount. See also biological half-life, effective half-life, radioactive half-life.
Health physics: A scientific field that focuses on protection of humans and the environment from
radiation. Health physics uses physics, biology, chemistry, statistics, and electronic instrumentation
to help protect people from any potential hazards of radiation. For more information, see the Health
Physics Society website:
http://www.hps.org/
Health physicist: A specialist in radiation safety. See health physics.
Intake: Amount of radioactive material taken into the body by ingestion, inhalation, or absorption
through the skin via wounds or injection.
Ionizing radiation: Any radiation capable of displacing electrons from atoms, thereby producing ions.
High doses of ionizing radiation may produce severe skin or tissue damage.
Irradiation: Exposure to radiation. See exposure and compare with contamination.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page B-3

I
J

Latent period: The time between exposure to a toxic material and the appearance of a resultant
health effect.
Neutron: One of the primary forms of ionizing radiation, the others being alpha particles, beta
particles, gamma rays, and x-rays. Neutrons are highly penetrating and are a radiation hazard in the
time immediately following a nuclear detonation. In almost all other radiation emergency scenarios,
encountering neutron radiation or contamination is unlikely. Detection of neutrons requires
specialized equipment.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Non-stochastic effects: See deterministic effects.
Penetrating radiation: Radiation that can penetrate the skin and reach internal organs and tissues.
Photons (gamma rays and x-rays), neutrons, and protons are penetrating radiations. However, alpha
particles and all but extremely high-energy beta particles are not considered penetrating radiation.
Population monitoring: The process of identifying, screening, and monitoring people for exposure to
radiation or contamination with radioactive materials.
Portal monitor: A portable doorway-like radiation detection system for monitoring people for
radioactive contamination. The monitors look similar to metal detectors used in airport security
screening stations. Certain types of portal monitors are used routinely to monitor vehicles or waste
containers leaving hospitals or entering junk yards. When used to monitor people, they can be used
in walk-through mode or by having each person stand in the monitor for a brief time period. The
portal monitors do NOT produce radiation, and they can only measure gamma and high-energy beta
radiation.
Plume: A cloud, gas, or vapor that carries radioactive material released into the atmosphere away
from the incident site in the direction of the wind. Making plume concentration predictions with time
after the incident is necessary to determine whether affected populations should shelter in place or
evacuate. Plume predictions use mathematical models and, although very helpful, are prone to
inherent uncertainties.
Prenatal radiation exposure: Radiation exposure to an embryo or fetus while it is still in utero (in its
mother’s womb). At certain stages of the pregnancy, the fetus is particularly sensitive to radiation,
and the health consequences could be severe above certain radiation dose levels. For more
information, see:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/prenatal.asp
Public monitoring: See population monitoring.
Rad (radiation absorbed dose): A unit of measurement for absorbed dose. It measures the amount
of energy absorbed in a material. The unit rad can be used for any type of radiation, but it does not
describe the biological effects of the different radiations. The international unit of absorbed dose is
the gray (Gy). 1 rad = 0.01 Gy; 100 rad = 1 Gy. See absorbed dose. For more information, see:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/glossary.asp#primer
Radiation: Energy moving in the form of particles or waves. Familiar radiations are heat, light, radio
waves, and microwaves. Gamma rays (like x-rays) are ionizing radiation, a very high-energy form of
electromagnetic radiation.
Radiation sickness: See acute radiation syndrome (ARS).
Radioactive contamination: See contamination.
Radioactive decay: See decay, radioactive.
Radioactive half-life: See half-life.
Radioactive material: Material that contains unstable (radioactive) atoms that give off radiation as
they decay.

Page B-4

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Radioactivity: The process of spontaneous transformation of the nucleus, generally with the emission
of alpha or beta particles that are often accompanied by gamma rays. This process is referred to as
decay or disintegration of an atom. See activity.
Radiobioassay: See bioassay.
Radiogenic: Health effects caused by exposure to ionizing radiation.
Radiological or radiologic: Related to radioactive materials or radiation. The radiological sciences
focus on the measurement and effects of radiation.
A

Radionuclide: An unstable and therefore radioactive form of an element.
Rem: (roentgen equivalent man): A conventional unit for a derived quantity called radiation dose
equivalent. This relates the absorbed dose in human tissue to the effective biological damage of the
radiation. Not all radiation has the same biological effect, even for the same amount of absorbed
dose. Dose equivalent is often expressed as thousandths of a rem, or millirem (mrem). The
international unit for radiation dose equivalent is the sievert (Sv). 1 rem = 0.01 sieverts (Sv). For
more information, see:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/glossary.asp#primer
Resuspension: The physical process of making airborne radioactive contamination that otherwise
would have remained deposited on the surface of objects. For example, wind blowing across a
sidewalk will resuspend previously deposited contaminants, making them airborne in the breathing
zone.
Roentgen (R): A unit of exposure to x-rays or gamma rays.

B
C
D
E
F

Shielding: Material that can block or intercept radiation emanating from a radioactive source.
Sievert (Sv): The international unit for a derived quantity called radiation dose equivalent. This
relates the absorbed dose in human tissue to the effective biological damage of the radiation. Not
all radiation has the same biological effect, even for the same amount of absorbed dose. Dose
equivalent is often expressed as millionths of a sievert, or microsieverts (µSv). The conventional unit
for radiation dose equivalent is the rem. 1 Sv = 100 rem. For more information, see:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/glossary.asp#primer
SI units: The Systeme Internationale (or International System) of units and measurements. This
system of units officially came into being in October 1960 and has been adopted by nearly all
countries, although the amount of actual usage varies considerably. For more information, see:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/glossary.asp#primer
Somatic effects: The health effects of radiation that are limited to the exposed person, as
distinguished from genetic effects, which may also affect subsequent generations. See also
teratogenic effects.
Stochastic effects: The health effects that occur on a random basis independent of the size of dose
(e.g., cancer). The effects typically have no threshold and are based on probabilities, with the
chances of seeing the effects increasing with dose. If they occur, the severity of stochastic effects is
independent of the dose received. See also deterministic effects.
Teratogenic effects: Birth defects that are not passed on to future generations, caused by exposure
to a toxin as a fetus. See also genetic effects, somatic effects.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page B-5

G
H
I
J

APPENDIX C: ADDITIONAL CONSIDERATIONS AFTER A NUCLEAR
DETONATION

Appendix C
Additional Considerations After a Nuclear Detonation
One assumption in defining the scope of this guide is that the local response infrastructure remained
relatively intact. This assumption is not likely to hold in the case of a nuclear detonation (i.e., military
weapon or improvised nuclear device). The public health authorities responding to a nuclear
detonation are likely to be from surrounding communities that are less affected by the detonation
and from even further distant communities that may be receiving displaced populations from the
affected areas.
This appendix describes how key concepts provided in this guide can be used in planning for
population monitoring after a nuclear detonation. In addition, you should become familiar with the
Planning Guidance for Response to a Nuclear Detonation where a chapter is dedicated to the
subject of population monitoring and decontamination.21
In a nuclear emergency, the most pertinent guiding principles of population monitoring, as outlined
in this guide, are the following:




The first priority is to save lives; respond to and treat the injured first.
Initial population monitoring activities should focus on preventing acute radiation health
effects.
Scalability and flexibility are important parts of the planning process.

Early decisions by emergency responders and response authorities related to contamination
screening and decontamination should be made in the context of the overall response operations.
For example, survival rates will decrease if emergency evacuation is constrained by policies that
inhibit the transportation of potentially contaminated patients and their admission into medical
facilities.21
Furthermore, the needs of a displaced population and concerned citizens hundreds of miles away
are different from those of the immediate victims near the site of detonation. Therefore, radiation
survey methods, screening criteria, and decontamination protocol should be adjusted to reflect the
prioritized needs of the affected population and the availability of resources at any given location.

What Are the Objectives of Population Monitoring After a Nuclear Detonation?

B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

The objectives of population monitoring are also applicable to a nuclear detonation. These
objectives are listed in order of priority.
1. Identify individuals whose health is in immediate danger and who need immediate care,
medical attention (whether radiation-related or not), or decontamination.
2. Identify people who may need medical treatment for contamination or exposure, further
evaluation, or short-term health monitoring.
3. Recommend (and to the extent possible, facilitate) practical steps to minimize the risk of
future health consequences (e.g., cancer).
4. Register potentially affected populations for long-term health monitoring.
Priorities after a nuclear detonation will differ from priorities after a radiological incident (such as the
detonation of a dirty bomb). In a radiological incident, the majority of the population will be cared for

21 Homeland Security Council (HSC) Interagency Policy Coordination Subcommittee for Preparedness &

Response to Radiological and Nuclear Threats (SubIPC). Planning Guidance for Response to a Nuclear
Detonation. Second Edition. June 2010. Washington, D.C.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

A

Page C-1

under Objective 3. This is because relatively few casualties are expected from a radiological
incident, and few people will be contaminated with amounts of radioactive material that will be
immediately hazardous to their health.

A
B
C
D
E

However, after a nuclear detonation, focus will be on Objective 1. The number of people who would
need immediate medical care is almost certain to overwhelm available resources. Models of a small
improvised nuclear device detonation predict upwards of 300,000 victims who will have a variety of
immediate medical needs.22 Therefore, the focus should be placed on locating people who need
immediate medical care and providing that care. Extensive search and rescue operations will
require accompanying health physics support and expertise due to the residual radiation
environment. Providing medical care to those in immediate need will likely consume all of the
available medical staff’s time and resources.

Are There Any Radioactive Contamination Issues?
The potential contamination issues will be very significant. A terrorism-related nuclear detonation is
likely to be a ground burst or detonation at a low elevation that causes significant nuclear fallout.
This can result in additional (but avoidable) casualties. Emphasis should be placed on preventing or
minimizing exposure to nuclear fallout. By issuing timely recommendations for protective action
(what to do or what to avoid doing), public health authorities can help people in the community
minimize their exposure to nuclear fallout.

Are Community Reception Centers Still Needed?
F
G
H
I
J

A multitude of community reception centers (CRCs) will have to be established in surrounding
communities, perhaps stretching as far as hundreds of miles away, to address the needs of people
who have been displaced because of the blast or evacuated because of the fallout. The needs in
this population—such as contamination screening for external and internal contamination and
providing clothing, shelter, and counseling—are similar to those described in other sections of this
guide.
Care facilities established near the detonation site will be focused on providing immediate medical
care to those who are injured. Screening for radioactive contamination, decontamination, and other
issues typically addressed at CRCs will be a secondary priority.

What Types of Injuries Are Expected from a Nuclear Blast?
For more detailed information regarding medical management of radiation injuries, health care
providers will find the following website a helpful resource:
Radiation Emergency Medical Management (REMM)—Guidance on Diagnosis and Treatment for
Health Care Providers (http://www.remm.nlm.gov/)
The following overview is provided for public health planners.
People who survive the immediate effect of a nuclear detonation are likely to suffer from combined
injury. They may have sustained flash blindness, skin burns, hearing loss, and other physical trauma
in addition to radiation exposure.

22 Weisdorf D, Chao N, Waselenko JK, Dainiak N, Armitage JO, McNiece I, Confer D (2006). Acute Radiation

Injury: Contingency Planning for Triage, Supportive Care, and Transplantation. Biology of Blood and Marrow
Transplantation 12(6):672-82.

Page C-2

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

People who are exposed to radiation fall into one of three general categories:
1. Individuals who may be expected to make a full recovery from their radiation exposure
with little or no medical intervention.
2. Individuals who are unlikely to survive regardless of the level of medical care provided.
3. Individuals whose survival will depend on the careful administration of supportive care.
The ability to deliver supportive care will depend on the number of casualties and
available resources.
Supportive care for acute radiation syndrome (ARS) includes several modalities. While
administration of colony stimulating factors (CSFs) is critical to recovery, the provision of high-quality
intensive nursing care is equally important to ensuring the long-term survival of ARS patients.
Supportive care interventions requiring skilled physician and nursing care include the following:











Antibiotic, antiviral, and antifungal medications
Antiemetics to control vomiting
Antidiarrheals
Fluid and electrolyte resuscitation
Pain management
Endotracheal intubation
Blood products
Stem cell transplantation
Cytokines and other medical countermeasures
Combined injury management (i.e., treatment of flash blindness, skin burns, eardrum
rupture, and other injuries).

People who have sustained combined injury represent a separate triage category. These individuals,
depending on their radiation dose and the nature of their trauma, have a higher risk for a poor
prognosis. Individuals requiring surgical intervention should undergo necessary surgery within 36
hours and no later than 48 hours post-injury.
As the number of victims rises in a nuclear mass casualty incident, and because the management of
ARS victims is complex and resource intensive, medical authorities working in resource-depleted
conditions may be faced with making difficult decisions to focus on patients with better prognoses
for survival.23
Clearly, any available resources will be directed toward these lifesaving activities in support of the
first objective of the population monitoring process.

23 Waselenko JK, MacVittie TJ, Blakely WF, Pesik N, Wiley AL, Dickerson WE, Tsu H, Confer DL, Coleman CN,

Seed T, Lowry P, Armitage JO, Dainiak N (2004). Medical Management of the Acute Radiation Syndrome:
Recommendations of the Strategic National Stockpile Radiation Working Group. Annals of Internal Medicine
140:1037-51.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page C-3

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

APPENDIX D: RADIOLOGICAL SCREENING CRITERIA -- EXTERNAL
CONTAMINATION

Appendix D
Radiological Screening Criteria—External Contamination
Radiological screening for external contamination is performed to assess the amount of radioactive
materials on the skin and clothing. These materials can irradiate the body when beta- and gammaemitting radionuclides are present. If the radioactive material remains on skin or clothing, it could
be released into the air and inhaled or it could be incidentally ingested, resulting in internal
contamination. Internal contamination is particularly significant in the case of alpha-emitting
radionuclides.

A

External contamination on the body can be spread to other people, places, or items, resulting in
cross-contamination. Cross-contamination is a public health concern, although it is secondary to
immediate concerns for people’s health and safety.

B

In this appendix, a number of benchmark screening criteria and their technical bases are briefly
described. This description is followed by recommendations on how to select particular screening
criteria to best serve public health in a variety of circumstances.

C

The information in this appendix is intended for planning purposes. Planners should consider and
discuss this information with health physics/radiation protection experts in their state radiation
control and public health programs during the planning process for a range of possible
circumstances, prior to any incidents.
The screening values are listed using the same measurement units as the original guidance
documents for easy reference. When appropriate, unit conversions are given in parentheses.

Benchmark Screening Criteria

D
E
F
G

This appendix will describe the following documents:









FEMA (1995). Federal Emergency Management Agency, Contamination Monitoring
Standard for a Portal Monitor Used for Radiological Emergency Response, FEMA-REP-21,
March 1995.
FEMA (2002). Federal Emergency Management Agency, Contamination Monitoring
Guidance for Portable Instruments Used for Radiological Emergency Response to
Nuclear Power Plant Accidents, FEMA-REP-22, October 2002.
NCRP (2005). National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Key
Elements of Preparing Emergency Responders for Nuclear and Radiological Terrorism,
Commentary No. 19, December 2005.
NCRP (2008). National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements,
Management of Persons Contaminated with Radionuclides: Handbook, Report No. 161,
December 2008.
NCRP (2010). National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Population
Monitoring and Radionuclide Decorporation Following a Radiological or Nuclear Incident,
Report No. 166, April 2010.
CRCPD (2006). Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors, Inc., Handbook for
Responding to a Radiological Dispersal Device. First Responder’s Guide— the First 12
Hours, September 2006.
IAEA (2005). International Atomic Energy Agency, Generic Procedures for Medical
Response During a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency, April 2005.
IAEA (2006). International Atomic Energy Agency Manual for First Responders to a
Radiological Emergency, October 2006.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page D-1

H
I
J





A
B
C
D

IAEA (2011). International Atomic Energy Agency, Criteria for Use in Preparedness and
Response for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency. General Safety Guide No. GSG-2,
May 2011.
EPA (1992). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Manual of Protective Action Guides
and Protective Actions for Nuclear Incidents, EPA-400-R-92-001, May 1992.
EPA (2013). U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, PAG Manual, Protective Action
Guides and Planning Guidance for Radiological Incidents, draft for interim use and public
comment, March 2013.

The FEMA REP-21 and REP-22 documents have associated technical background documents that
discuss the technical bases and assumptions of the guidance. These two guidance documents are
intended for radiation emergencies involving nuclear power plant facilities. They do not address
terrorism incidents. The remaining documents do address terrorism, with CRCPD specifically
focusing on Radiological Dispersal Device (RDD) incidents. With NCRP and IAEA, there is a
progression of guidance documents addressing the skin contamination criteria.
Lastly, the 1992 EPA Manual of Protective Action Guides (PAGs)—which is the earliest of documents
described here—has been updated. The updated EPA PAG Manual was issued in 2013 for interim
use and public comment. The recommended skin contamination screening levels remain
unchanged in the draft 2013 PAG Manual and are described in this appendix.

E

Radiation Control Zones

F

Although this topic does not directly deal with population monitoring, it does affect the manner in
which people at the scene are directed. FEMA REP documents do not address this topic, but the
NCRP 2005, CRCPD, and IAEA 2006 documents are consistent in the manner in which they
delineate radiation control zones at the scene. All three documents identify two major zones:

G



H



I
J

Inner perimeter with radiation levels exceeding 100 mSv/h (10 R/h) and where only
lifesaving or other mission-critical activities should be performed with very short (few
minutes) stay times.
Outer perimeter with radiation levels exceeding 0.1 mSv/h (10 mR/h) from which people
are evacuated. The area is isolated, and controlled entry is implemented to allow in only
first responders with appropriate personal protection equipment.

CRCPD recommends that the outer perimeter should be set at lower than 0.1 mSv/h (10 mR/h) if it
is practical (i.e., the area does not become too large or too distant from the epicenter of the blast).
CRCPD also states that responders may define additional boundaries, if needed, at 1 mSv/h (100
mR/h) and 10 mSv/h (1000 mR/h).
People (Skin and Clothing) Screening Criteria
Both the FEMA REP documents and the NCRP 2005 recognize two health-based concerns:



Deterministic effects—acute exudative radiodermatitis has the limiting radiation dose
threshold
Long-term stochastic effects—skin cancer

FEMA also defines two types of contamination: loose and fixed. Loose contamination can be
removed by washing or changing clothes. FEMA assumes that, on average, people will be able to
bathe and remove loose contamination within 36 hours of the incident. Fixed skin contamination
will remain even after bathing and will be removed by natural processes within 2 weeks.

Page D-2

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Concerning acute effects, FEMA sets a limit of 3.7 kBq (0.1 μCi) for fixed contamination on a spot of
skin.24 If it is assumed that contamination is mixed (loose-plus-fixed contamination), FEMA sets a
higher limit of 37 kBq (1.0 μCi) for spot contamination.
Concerning the stochastic effects, FEMA sets a limit of 2.7 MBq (74 μCi) for fixed contamination over
the body, regardless of distribution. If uniformly distributed over the surface of an adult body, this
corresponds to 150 Bq/cm2, which is equal to 0.004 μCi/cm2 or 9,000 disintegrations per minute
(dpm)/cm2. If it is assumed that contamination is mixed, a higher limit of 27 MBq (740 μCi) is set for
distributed contamination. For an adult, this is equal to 1.5 kBq/cm2, which is equal to 0.04
μCi/cm2, or 90,000 dpm/cm2.

A

NCRP 2005 states that people with spot contamination on the skin exceeding 2.2 x 106 dpm have
priority for decontamination. This equals FEMA’s 37 kBq (1 μCi) limit for mixed contamination
described above.

B

NCRP 2005 further states that “decontamination procedures should strive to reduce” surface
contamination below the following limits:

C




2.2 x 105 dpm (3.7 kBq; 0.1 μCi) on any one spot
10,000 dpm/cm2 (170 Bq/cm2) surface body contamination

D

Note that NCRP contamination guides are numerically equal to FEMA’s limits for fixed contamination.
The language is slightly different in the two documents. Whereas FEMA sets these values as upper
limits, NCRP 2005 (Commentary 19) recommends these as guides that decontamination procedures
should strive to meet or exceed.
Contamination survey equipment does not measure in units of surface activity such as kBq/cm2 or
μCi. The instruments typically read in units of counts per minute (cpm). For first responders, the
screening criteria should be given in operational units. The conversion to operational units is made
considering the sensitive area of the probe and the probe counting efficiency for the particular type
of radionuclide. Operational units may vary by orders of magnitude among the various available
probes. Therefore, it is essential to relate or correlate the above criteria to the specific equipment
being used by personnel responsible for conducting screening.
FEMA evaluated several instruments and decided to recommend a single value, equivalent to the
response for the least sensitive Civil Defense (CD) instrument (CD V-700 with a standard detector).
This value is 300 cpm above background. FEMA states that using this criterion with more sensitive
instrument combinations will provide an additional level of protection. In the background
information document for REP-22 Guidance, FEMA states the following:



For CD V-700s that have been retrofitted with a GM pancake detector, criteria could be
set at 1,000 cpm and 10,000 cpm for fixed and loose-plus-fixed contamination,
respectively.
For more modern (non CD V-700) instruments with pancake detectors, criteria of 10,000
cpm and 100,000 cpm could be used for fixed and loose-plus-fixed contamination,
respectively.

Generally, the fixed contamination criterion is applied to people who have showered and changed
clothes. The criterion for loose-plus-fixed contamination is applied to those who have not yet washed
or changed clothes.
NCRP 2005 (Commentary 19) values correspond to FEMA’s values for fixed contamination. NCRP,
however, does not provide operational units. Users would have to make such calculations for their
own types of instruments.

24 Spot size is defined by both FEMA and NCRP as an area of 0.2 cm 2 or a circle 0.5 cm in diameter.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page D-3

E
F
G
H
I
J

Both NCRP 2005 and FEMA documents assume a mixture of radionuclides from a nuclear reactor
mix.
FEMA REP-21 is the only one of the documents that addresses portal monitors and suggests 37 kBq
or 1.0 μCi as the Standard of Detectability for beta/gamma activity.
The CRCPD Handbook focuses on RDD incidents. The screening criteria given in the CRCPD
Handbook are in operational units and assume the use of a GM pancake survey meter. CRCPD
states the following:
A



B



C

With contamination levels up to 1,000 cpm, people can be instructed to go home and
shower. This level is equal to 440 dpm/cm2, compared to the NCRP value of 10,000
dpm/cm2.25
In case of a large incident or if adequate decontamination resources are not available,
the release level can be increased to 10,000 cpm (0.05 mR/h using a gamma detector).
This is equal to 4,400 dpm/cm2, compared to the NCRP value of 10,000 dpm/cm2.

D

The CRCPD Handbook also recommends that to minimize the spread of contamination at hospitals
decontamination can be performed to levels below 1,000 cpm by using a GM pancake survey meter,
but only if such decontamination efforts do not interfere with patient medical treatment.

E

The CRCPD Handbook states that establishing higher decontamination limits (i.e., higher than
10,000 cpm) may be necessary, depending on the number of patients and the decontamination
resources available.

F
G
H
I
J

The NCRP 2008 (Report 161) provided a graded approach for skin contamination levels that was
adopted from an earlier IAEA 2005 guidance. This graded approach provided skin contamination
limits for alpha and beta/gamma radiation when no action is required or when intervention may be
optional, advisable, or required. Intervention includes preventing inadvertent ingestion and
inhalation, limiting the spread of contamination, and decontaminating.
Using the criterion of dose equivalent rate measured at 10 cm from skin surface in a low-background
area, the NCRP 2008 recommendation can be simplified as follows:



2-3 times background dose rate – intervention is advisable
20-30 times background dose rate – intervention is required

The NCRP 2008 stated that the skin decontamination objective is to reduce the level to less than
two times background. However, this guidance recognized that less stringent criteria may be used
when lack of resources or the number of contaminated people makes it impracticable to achieve this
objective.
For situations when large numbers of people are contaminated and the goal of less than two times
background is impractical, the NCRP 2008 provided the following decontamination guidance which
is similar to NCRP 2005 values for beta/gamma radiation, and it adopted the IAEA 2005 approach
by applying a reduction factor of 10 for alpha radiation:





Beta/gamma < 220,000 dpm (3.7 kBq) on any one spot (0.2 cm2)
Beta/gamma < 10,000 dpm/cm2 (170 Bq/cm2) surface body contamination
Alpha < 22,000 dpm (0.37 kBq) on any one spot (0.2 cm2)
Alpha < 1,000 dpm/cm2 (17 Bq/cm2) surface body contamination

The NCRP 2010 (Report No. 166) stated that the affected individuals whose medical conditions are
not life-threatening should receive contamination screening to the extent that their medical
conditions, the availability of survey equipment, weather conditions, and personnel resources
permit. NCRP 2010 recommended a screening value of 1,000 cpm when surveying with a GM

25 Assuming a probe area of 15 cm 2 and 15% counting efficiency.

Page D-4

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

pancake survey meter, consistent with the 2006 CRCPD Handbook. NCRP 2010 further stated that
individuals with contamination levels exceeding 1,000 cpm should be directed to a decontamination
station, and individuals with contamination levels less than 1,000 cpm can be released and advised
to shower and change clothes when they go home.
The most recent IAEA guidance, the IAEA 2011 General Safety Guide (GSG-2), provides a dose rate
criterion of 1 μSv/h (0.1 mrem/h) measured at 10 cm from the body. This standard is consistent
with the earlier guidance in IAEA 2006. This dose rate criterion is used to assess skin or clothing
contamination from strong gamma emitters.
In addition, the IAEA GSG-2 provides the following skin surface activity criteria for cases when the
radionuclide(s) are unknown or for when an immediate conservative assessment is needed:



1,000 counts per second (60,000 cpm) beta skin contamination
50 counts per second (3,000 cpm) alpha skin contamination

B

The IAEA recommends skin decontamination if these criteria are exceeded. If immediate
decontamination is not practicable, people are advised to change their clothing and shower as soon
as possible.
Unlike the earlier IAEA criteria, these latest skin decontamination criteria are in units of counts per
second. The IAEA refers to the above skin screening criteria as Operational Intervention Levels
(OILs). The response of particular radiation detection instruments may vary significantly depending
on detector efficiency, size of the detector window, etc. Therefore, the IAEA recommends that, as
part of the preparedness process, these OILs be revised accordingly to be more consistent with the
characteristics of particular instruments. The IAEA criteria listed above were established so that the
majority of commonly available radiation detection equipment would give a response that is equal to
or higher (i.e., more conservative) than the response assumed in developing the default OILs (IAEA
2011).
The EPA Manual of Protective Action Guides was first published in 1992 before the other documents
discussed in this appendix. The PAG manual, in the 1992 version and in the updated 2013 version,
recommends that contamination screening and decontamination facilities be established in low
background areas. These are defined as areas with gamma exposure rates less than 1 μSv/h (0.1
mR/h). The PAG manual also acknowledges that in major radiation incidents, emergency
contamination screening stations may need to be set up in areas not qualifying as low background
areas. The PAG manual recommends that gamma exposure rates in these areas should be less than
50 μSv/h (5 mR/h).
In either case, EPA’s recommended surface screening level for people is set at twice existing
background. Corresponding levels, expressed in operational units related to particular survey
instruments, may be used for convenience. The draft 2013 PAG manual further recommends that
levels greater than twice existing background—not to exceed 1 μSv/h (0.1 mR/h)—may be used to
speed the monitoring process in very low background areas.

Selecting a Screening Criterion
As evidenced from the preceding discussion, there are a large number of factors to consider in
deciding on a contamination screening criterion. The guidance documents consider health-based
criteria for establishing contamination limits. CRCPD screening values are somewhat lower than
those recommended by FEMA and NCRP. This is because of consideration given to crosscontamination issues that do not necessarily present a health concern. However, public perception
can cause anxiety, lack of confidence, and disruption of other services that could then affect the
public health in a different way.
Both the EPA Manual of Protective Action Guides (1992) and NCRP Report 161 (2008) state that the
skin decontamination objective is to reduce the level to less than two times background. At the
same time, both guidance documents recognize there are situations when this ideal may not be

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

A

Page D-5

C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

practicable because of the number of contaminated people, lack of facilities, equipment, staff, or
other circumstances. Other guidance criteria may be applicable, particularly during the emergency
phase of the response.
The initial screening criteria must focus on preventing acute health effects and must take into
account the magnitude of the incident and availability of resources. The specific operational criteria
provided to first responders must match the types of instruments they will be using.

A
B
C
D
E
F

The plan should also be flexible. It may be prudent to use less stringent criteria (i.e., allowing for
greater levels of contamination) for people with their own personal transportation or those using
transportation provided by emergency response authorities. On the other hand, using more stringent
criteria (i.e., allowing for much less contamination) for people who plan to use uncontrolled public
transportation may be warranted.
If the initial screening criterion is isolating an unmanageable number of people for decontamination,
the criterion may have to be less stringent. Conversely, if resources allow, a more stringent criterion
may be adopted.
In some circumstances, it may be practical to use physical location based on proximity to the
incident site as a criterion for prioritizing the population in most urgent need of assistance with
decontamination. Under those circumstances, assist those in the specified zone (without any initial
screening) to decontaminate at the scene, and instruct people outside the zone to go home to selfdecontaminate.
As a result of these considerations, CDC does not recommend setting a predetermined, fixed
screening criterion to be applied to all people for all incidents, under all circumstances. CDC
recommends that you and your state radiation control authority, as state planners and decision
makers, consider a range of possible circumstances, keeping the following in mind:

G




H




I



J

Population monitoring objectives as described in this guide
Specific radiation survey instruments your responders will be using (e.g., dose rate
meters, portal monitors, specific types of surface contamination monitors)
Staffing resources and size of the population you may be expected to process
Facilities and resources you have for offering on-the-scene contamination screening and
decontamination
Availability of other resources

The planning should be done in advance, allowing some room for flexibility. The emergency
responders, however, must have very clear instructions to follow on the basis of your evaluation of
the specific local circumstances. CDC is available to assist you in the planning process. In the
aftermath of a radiological or nuclear incident, the Federal Advisory Team for Environment, Food,
and Health can assist you in establishing practicable screening criteria based on specific local
circumstances.26

26 The Federal Advisory Team for Environment, Food, and Health develops coordinated advice and
recommendations to the coordinating agencies and state and local governments and includes
representatives from CDC, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the U.S Environmental
Protection Agency (EPA), the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), and other federal agencies, as
needed.

Page D-6

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

APPENDIX E: RADIOLOGICAL SCREENING CRITERIA -- INTERNAL
CONTAMINATION

Appendix E
Radiological Screening Criteria—Internal Contamination
Internal contamination occurs when people swallow or breathe in radioactive materials, or when
radioactive materials enter the body through an open wound or are absorbed through the skin. Over
time, radioactive material is eliminated from the body in sweat, urine, and feces. This could take
days, months, or years, depending on the type of radionuclides and their physical and biological halflives.
Having internal contamination does not necessarily mean the person is going to experience health
problems. Every day, tens of thousands of people in the United States undergo diagnostic testing
that involves medical administration of short-lived radioactive materials after which the patients are
released to go home.27
If the amount of radioactive material is medically significant (this will be discussed later), the person
may have an increased risk of developing cancer and in severe cases, develop acute radiation injury.
In case of extremely high doses, internal contamination with radioactive material could be lethal.
However, this is rare. For example, an incident involving a radiological dispersal device is likely to
result in a limited number of people with medically significant amounts of internal contamination and
a much larger population with only small amounts of internal contamination.

A
B
C
D
E

When a person is internally contaminated, depending on the type of radioactive material he/she is
contaminated with, certain medications can be administered to speed up the rate at which the
radioactive material is eliminated from the body.28 Note that internal decontamination is a medical
procedure that should be performed only at the order and under the guidance of a licensed
physician.

G

Information about the levels of internal contamination is important in deciding whether any or both
of the following are warranted.

H




Medical intervention
Long-term health monitoring

I

Although the decisions about long-term health monitoring can be made in a more deliberate fashion
and involve all stakeholders, decisions about medical intervention are time-sensitive.

Screening Criteria
The National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP) has published an
authoritative report regarding medical screening and management of internally contaminated
individuals.28 In this report, the NCRP defined a new operational guide, the Clinical Decision Guide
(CDG), to help physicians make clinical decisions about individuals with internal contamination who
may need treatment. The numerical values of dose used as a basis for computing the adult CDG
intake values for different radionuclides (excluding isotopes of iodine) are as follows:

27 NCRP (2009). National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Ionizing Radiation Exposure of

the Population of the United States, Report No. 160, March 2009.
28 NCRP (2008). National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Management of Persons

Accidentally Contaminated with Radionuclides: Handbook, Report No. 161, December 2008.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

F

Page E-1

J





0.25 Sv (50-year effective dose) whole body
0.25 Gy-Eq (30-day RBE-weighted absorbed dose) to the bone marrow29
1 Gy-Eq (30-day RBE-weighted absorbed dose) to the lung

For any particular radionuclide, the most limiting criterion is used to define the CDG. For nearly all
radionuclides, the CDG is based on the 0.25 Sv effective dose criterion.
The CDG values are defined for adults. For children and women who are pregnant or nursing, the
NCRP recommends that the screening value be reduced to one-fifth (20%) of the CDG.
A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H

In the case of iodine-131, the NCRP bases its CDG values on the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) recommendations.30 FDA recommends that potassium iodide (KI) in doses ranging from 16 to
130 mg be administered to:






Adults older than 40 years, if thyroid dose is ≥ 5 Gy. Dose = 130 mg.
Adults older than 18 years through 40 years, if thyroid dose is ≥ 0.1 Gy. Dose = 130 mg.
Persons through age 18 years, if thyroid dose is ≥ 0.05 Gy. Dose = 16 mg (birth through
1 month), 32 mg (age over 1 month through 3 years), 64 mg (age over 3 through 12
years), 64 mg (age over 12 through 18 years). If body weight approaches 70 kg, the adult
dose is recommended.
Pregnant or lactating women of any age, if thyroid dose is ≥ 0.05 Gy. Dose = 130 mg.

The CDG values recommended by the NCRP are similar to the guidance issued earlier by the Internal
Commission on Radiological Protection (ICRP) in 2005.31 The ICRP emphasized that treatment for
internal contamination “should be under the direction of a physician experienced in these matters,
and should take individual patient factors into account.”
In fact, the amount of internal radioactive contamination is only one of many parameters a physician
would evaluate in assessing the need for treatment. A person’s age and general state of health,
organ function (kidney, liver, lung, etc.), pregnancy status, iodine sensitivity, emotional state, time
since intake, and the biochemical and physical properties of the internally deposited radioactive
material are among the factors physicians might evaluate and consider in order to make their best
medical judgment.32 However, in incidents involving large populations, it is unlikely that detailed
medical evaluations can be made for each person.

I

Assessing the Amount of Internal Contamination

J

In general, the amount of internal contamination in the body can be assessed by direct or indirect
methods. The direct (in vivo) screening relies on measurement of radiation emanating from the
body. A typical example is a whole-body counter. The indirect (in vitro) screening relies on analyzing
material removed or excreted from the body, such as nasal swabs, urine samples, or fecal samples.
For both bioassay methods, it is important to recognize the difference between detection of radiation
from a body (direct screening) or quantification of radioactive materials in a sample (indirect
screening) and the accurate quantification of intake in an individual. In other words, the estimation

29 This dose quantity is a measure of radiation dose to a specific organ, and it also accounts for the quality of

radiation; RBE = relative biological effectiveness.
30 U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Guidance: Potassium Iodide as a Thyroid Blocking Agent in Radiation

Emergencies, 2001, available at www.fda.gov/downloads/Drugs/.../Guidances/ucm080542.pdf.
31 ICRP (2005). Internal Commission on Radiological Protection. Protecting People Against Radiation Exposure

in the Event of a Radiological Attack, Publication 96, Ann. ICRP 35 (1), 2005.
32 NCRP (2010). National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Population Monitoring and

Radionuclide Decorporation Following a Radiological or Nuclear Incident, Report No. 166, April 2010.

Page E-2

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

of intake by both bioassay methods involves inherent, often large uncertainties that must be
recognized.
The NCRP Report 166 includes an extensive discussion of both these screening methods. This
report discusses rapid screening using radiation detection equipment such as GM survey meters,
whole-body and lung counters, nuclear medicine thyroid uptake counters and gamma cameras, as
well as portal monitors.33 There is also a discussion of various indirect (in vitro) methods, the most
practical of which is analysis of spot urine samples. In case of alpha-emitting radionuclides, only
laboratory analysis can provide an assessment of internal contamination.
The NCRP Report 166 includes two appendices to describe collection, preparation, and shipping of
clinical samples.32 The CDC can receive and analyze urine samples. For urine samples that are to
be shipped to CDC, specific collection, processing, and shipping procedures and protocols can be
found on the CDC radiation emergencies website.34

Other Considerations

B
C

When the number of potentially contaminated people exceeds the available capacity to collect,
transport, or analyze all the samples in a short time period, medical authorities may find it necessary
to advise on treatment of internal contamination for a subset of the affected population on the basis
of other parameters. These parameters can include a person’s physical location at the time of the
incident, age, pregnancy status, iodine sensitivity, clinical comorbidities and injuries, or radiation
measurements using field-deployable instruments. Very likely, some prioritization scheme will be
necessary to identify individuals most in need of follow-up monitoring and medical care, if necessary.
As one example of such prioritization, the Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors, Inc.
(CRCPD) recommends that people with external contamination greater than 100,000 cpm
(measured with a GM pancake probe) be identified as a priority for follow-up of potential internal
contamination.35
As part of the planning process, public health authorities should evaluate their ability to screen
people for both external and internal contamination, and they should support medical providers
caring for internally contaminated patients. The logistics of collecting and processing clinical
samples as well as administering medical countermeasures need careful planning and
consideration. CDC is available to assist in the planning process. In the aftermath of a radiological
or nuclear incident, assistance can be requested from the Federal Advisory Team for Environment,
Food, and Health.36

33 In addition to NCRP Report 166, see these publications as examples: Wesley E. Bolch et al., Guidance on the

use of handheld survey meters for radiological triage: time-dependent detector count rates corresponding to
50, 250, and 500 mSV effective dose for adult males and adult females. Health Phys. 102(3):305-25 (2012);
Gary H. Kramer, et al., The HML’s New Field Deployable, High-Resolution Whole Body Counter, Health Phys.
89(5 Suppl):S60-8 (2005).
34 http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/labinfo.asp
35 CRCPD (2006). Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors, Inc., Handbook for Responding to a

Radiological Dispersal Device. First Responder’s Guide – the First 12 Hours. September 2006.
36 The Federal Advisory Team for Environment, Food, and Health develops coordinated advice and

recommendations to the coordinating agencies and state and local governments and includes representatives
from CDC, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the
U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA), the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS), and other federal
agencies, as needed.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

A

Page E-3

D
E
F
G
H
I
J

APPENDIX F: COMMUNITY RECEPTION CENTER SPECIFICATIONS

Appendix F
Community Reception Center Specifications
A radiation incident impacting a large population will require local response authorities to establish
one or more population monitoring and decontamination facilities to assess people for exposure,
contamination, and the need for decontamination or other medical follow-up. These facilities are
known as community reception centers (CRCs).

A

CRCs should be located outside of the affected area and be operational within 24 to 48 hours after
an incident or sooner if resources are available.

B

The basic services offered at a CRC include the following:





Screening people for radioactive contamination
Assisting people with washing or decontamination
Registering people for subsequent follow-up
Prioritizing people for further care

C
D

One important benefit of establishing CRCs is to reduce the potential burden on hospitals and
maximize scarce medical resources. Another benefit is to support the operations of public and
special needs shelters that will be hosting the displaced population. To best support shelter
operations, planners should consider establishing one or more CRCs at or near shelters operated by
the American Red Cross or other local organizations. For large incidents, planners may establish a
network of CRCs that feeds into a larger network of shelters, as diagramed in Figure 1.
Many communities have previously developed plans for responding to other public health
emergencies. These plans may already include provisions for establishing alternate care sites (ACS)
to help the majority of the people who may need some assistance or medical care but do not need
hospitalization. In some communities, these may be referred to as neighborhood emergency help
centers (NEHC). Plans usually call for these to be set up in well-known locations within the
community, such as high schools. Many communities also have plans to use these facilities as
Points of Dispensing (PODs) for distribution of medical supplies from the Strategic National Stockpile
in case of pandemic flu or other biological threats. These same facilities can also be used as CRCs
because they have very similar functions and staffing requirements. A new requirement would be to
add radiation detection equipment and radiation protection support personnel for contamination
screening and decontamination.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page F-1

E
F
G
H
I
J

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Figure 1: CRC Network Diagram

This appendix describes some of the features and requirements for CRCs and provides a breakdown
of the CRC process. Planners can compare the description with what is already included in the
public health emergency plan for setting up PODs.37

37 For example, see Point of Dispensing (POD) Operations Manual, Philadelphia Department of Public Health,
Division of Disease Control, Emergency Preparedness and Bioterrorism Program, 2006. Available at
www.naccho.org/toolbox/_toolbox/POD%20operations%20manual_1.pdf Also see archived CDC Webcasts,
Mass Antibiotic Dispensing: Streamlining POD Design and Operations, available at
http://www2a.cdc.gov/tceonline/registration/detailpage.asp?res_id=1863, and Mass Antibiotic Dispensing:
Taking the Guesswork out of POD Design, available at
http://www2a.cdc.gov/tceonline/registration/detailpage.asp?res_id=1518.

Page F-2

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Facility Description
Evaluate facilities or sites in your community that potentially could serve as CRCs. Planners should
consider the following:








Size
Location
Adequate restroom facilities
Shower (decontamination) rooms or facilities
Accommodations for people with disabilities and for pets
Environmental control (against excessive heat or cold)
Adequate access and exit control (in case of emergency evacuation)

A

To process large numbers of people, the facility should have adequate space and must have
definable entries and exits that can be controlled. Choosing an all-weather facility, like a covered
sports arena or convention center, is ideal. However, depending on the circumstances and weather,
a nearby park or large parking lot will suffice. Planners should establish agreements in advance with
facility or site owners and operators.

B

The CRC model (Figure 2, see foldout) contains seven stations, each described further in subsequent
sections. This CRC model is scalable and flexible according to the demands of the incident, and it
can be modified to accommodate pets (Figure 3, see foldout). Table 1 shows which stations fall
within the Contamination Control Zone and which stations fall within the Clean Zone. Staff working
at stations within the Contamination Control Zone may require personal protective equipment, as
determined by the site safety officer, to protect against cross-contamination.

D

Table 1: CRC Stations and Zones

C

E
F
G

Station

Zone
H

Initial Sorting
I

First Aid
Contamination Screening

Contamination Control Zone
J

Wash
Pet Services

Registration
Radiation Dose Assessment

Clean Zone

Discharge

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page F-3

Page F-4

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page F-5

Initial Sorting Station
At the Initial Sorting Station, staff greet and direct people where to go in the CRC. Staff will
determine whether a person

A
B
C
D
E
F






has an urgent medical need.
is highly contaminated with radioactive material.
requires special assistance.
has already showered or been decontaminated before coming to the CRC.

Initial Sorting staff may also assign ID numbers to people as they enter. These ID numbers can be
used for record-keeping purposes and tracking people and their belongings through the center.
Contamination Screening staff may be assigned to the Initial Sorting Station to screen people and
pets for high levels of radioactive contamination. This screening should be quick and nonintrusive,
and it can be done with a variety of radiation detection instruments. Planners should consult the
radiation control authorities in their jurisdictions to develop the screening protocol for the Initial
Sorting Station.
People who have special needs should be accompanied through the CRC by a staff member or a
caregiver. Children should not be separated from their parents. Some processes may need to be
modified to accommodate children or people with special needs. People arriving with pets should be
directed to the Pet Services Station to evaluate their pets for contamination.

G
H
I
J

Figure 4: Initial Sorting Station

Page F-6

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

First Aid Station
A person with an urgent medical need should be taken
directly to the First Aid Station to receive medical care. First
Aid staff and Contamination Screening staff should work
together to assess the patient’s medical needs and, if the
patient has not yet been through the Contamination
Screening Station, quickly screen the patient for
contamination.
If the patient needs advanced medical care, First Aid staff
should request medical transport through the chain of
command or by calling 911. If the patient is contaminated
with radioactive material, First Aid staff can perform a gross
decontamination by carefully removing the patient’s outer
layer of clothing before transport. Lifesaving care should
not be delayed due to concerns of cross-contamination.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H

Figure 5: First Aid Station

I
J

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page F-7

Contamination Screening Station
The Contamination Screening Station is where people are
monitored for radioactive contamination. Depending on
the resources and staff available, a combination of partialbody and full-body contamination screenings can be used
to identify contaminated people. An express lane can be
established for people who have showered or been
decontaminated before coming to the CRC.

A

A partial-body contamination screening focuses on the
hands, face, shoulders, head, and feet and can identify
most contaminated people. If contamination is detected
during this screening, that person will be escorted to the
Wash Station. If not, that person will undergo a full-body
contamination screening. The partial-body screening is an
optional contamination control measure that protects other
people waiting in line and the staff from crosscontamination.

B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

The full-body screening should be conducted by trained
staff using either handheld radiation detection instruments
or portal monitors. If contamination is detected during this
screening, that person will be escorted to the Wash
Station. If not, that person will proceed to Registration.
Planners should consult the radiation control authorities in
Figure 6: Contamination Screening Station their jurisdictions to determine screening protocols and
release criteria for the Contamination Screening Station.
Under certain circumstances, release criteria may need to be modified to alleviate bottlenecks at this
station or at the Wash Station. For example, the Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors,
Inc., has suggested release criteria for contamination screenings following a RDD ranging from
1,000 counts per minute (cpm) to 10,000 cpm, depending on the availability of decontamination
resources.38
Appendix D provides a more detailed discussion of external contamination screening criteria.

38 CRCPD (2006). Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors, Inc., Handbook for Responding to a
Radiological Dispersal Device. First Responder’s Guide—the First 12 Hours, September 2006.

Page F-8

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Wash Station
Wash Station staff review contamination
screening results to determine the best
method of decontamination for each
contaminated person. After a person
finishes washing, Contamination
Screening staff will perform a full-body
screening to ensure the person is clean
and can proceed to Registration.
Depending on the resources available,
CRC managers may decide to use
existing indoor shower facilities or an
outdoor decontamination unit.
Contaminated clothing should be bagged
and labeled with the person’s name and
ID number assigned upon entering the
CRC.
Contaminated clothing may be required
later for epidemiological or law
enforcement purposes. Bagged clothes
should be stored in a secure, remote
location at the CRC.

Figure 7: Wash Station

Other personal belongings, such as
wallets, keys, jewelry, and glasses,
should not be taken permanently from
the owners. As people go through the
Wash Station, their personal items
should be bagged, labeled with the
owner’s information, and returned to the
owner when he or she exits the Wash
Station. If resources permit, these items
can be screened for contamination and,
if possible, decontaminated before being
returned.

Because Wash Station staff will be assisting contaminated people, they will need personal protective
equipment to control cross-contamination. This equipment should provide splash protection when
working near showers or decontamination units. The site safety officer should coordinate with
radiation protection professionals to conduct a hazard assessment and issue the appropriate
personal protective equipment to staff members at this station.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page F-9

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Registration Station

A
B
Figure 8: Registration Station

C
D
E
F
G

Registration staff personnel collect demographic and incident-specific information from people who
have been screened for radioactive contamination and cleared to enter the Clean Zone.
This information is used to determine whether someone needs immediate follow-up at the Radiation
Dose Assessment Station and possibly long-term follow-up.
Information collected at the CRC must be accurate and accessible for possible additional interviews
and investigations. Procedures for managing data need to be clear and easy to understand.
Planners should consider modifying existing tools to capture information unique to radiological or
nuclear incidents. Because people reporting to this station have been screened and cleared, staff
here and at other stations in the Clean Zone require only minimal, if any, personal protective
equipment.

H
I
J

Page F-10

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Radiation Dose Assessment Station

A
B
Figure 9: Radiation Dose Assessment Station

C
The Radiation Dose Assessment Station requires specialized staff and equipment to






D

screen people for potential internal contamination.
assess each person’s radiation dose.
collect blood or urine samples for laboratory analysis.
assess each person’s need for treatment.
prioritize people for further care.

E

Planning to provide these services should be flexible and scalable, incorporating additional
resources as they become available.

F

If possible, CRC managers should assign a physician and a health physicist to oversee the Radiation
Dose Assessment Station. Clinicians and radiation protection professionals will need to work
together to determine the person’s radiation dose and need for additional medical care or follow-up.

G

Screening people for internal contamination at the CRC may not be possible in all situations;
however, the information gathered from this process can help clinicians prioritize patients for
additional medical care or follow-up. If resources are available at the CRC, blood samples can be
collected for radiation dose assessment or urine samples can be collected to assess the degree of
internal contamination. Trained laboratory staff should oversee sample collection and shipment to
appropriate laboratories for processing. As with any medical consultation, staff at this station should
take reasonable care to protect a patient’s confidentiality and medical information.

H

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page F-11

I
J

Discharge Station

A
B
C
D
Figure 10: Discharge Station

E
F
G
H

Discharge staff provide information for people leaving the CRC, including referrals to hospitals or
alternate care sites for additional medical follow-up. As possible, mental health professionals at this
station will assess each person’s need for counseling and make themselves available to address
psychological needs elsewhere in the CRC. People leaving the CRC may be



referred for additional care.
discharged to their home, to the home of a friend or family member, or to a public
shelter.

Planners should work closely with partner agencies, such as the American Red Cross, to streamline
the transition from the CRC to a public shelter and to ensure adequate relocation services are
provided.

I
J

Page F-12

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Pet Services Station

A
B
C
D
E
F

Figure 11: Pet Services Station

People arriving to the CRC with pets or service animals will be evaluated for urgent medical
conditions and screened for high levels of radioactive contamination before being directed to the Pet
Services Station. Contamination Screening staff will provide a quick screening of pets and service
animals. If they are contaminated, the owners will be asked to wash the animal. If the owners are
not physically capable, trained staff should be available to provide assistance. After cleaning, pets
will be held in an on-site kennel until the owner is discharged from the CRC. Service animals will be
allowed to enter the CRC with their owners.
Planners should work closely with partner agencies, such as the Humane Society of the United
States, to ensure adequate accommodations for pets.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page F-13

G
H
I
J

APPENDIX G: COMMUNITY RECEPTION CENTER TRAINING AND
PLANNING TOOLS

Appendix G
Community Reception Center Training and Planning Tools
In addition to the Community Reception Center (CRC) Process Flow Diagrams included in Appendix F,
the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) has developed the following training and
planning tools for CRC operations:




Virtual Community Reception Center (vCRC), a web-based training tool
Community Reception Center Simulation Tool for Evaluation and Planning (CRC-STEP), a
computer simulation program
RealOpt-CRC, a computer optimization program

A
B
C

Virtual Community Reception Center
The Virtual Community Reception Center (vCRC) is a web-based training tool that allows users to
explore a CRC in virtual space.39 vCRC features a multipanel display that integrates the threedimensional CRC scene, interactive process flow diagram, and CRC floor plan to show users where
they are in the process (Figure 12). vCRC features embedded videos that provide detailed
information about specific steps, and it also includes resources, such as job aids, job action sheets,
posters, and forms that users can customize and include in their CRC plans.

D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Figure 12: vCRC Interface

39 vCRC can be accessed at http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/crc/vcrc.asp.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page G-1

vCRC is well-suited for basic CRC training and can also be used for just-in-time training or to support
facilitated discussions and exercises.
vCRC is available online at: http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/crc/vcrc.asp.
CRC Simulation Tool for Evaluation and Planning

A

The Community Reception Center Simulation Tool for Evaluation and Planning (CRC-STEP) is a
computer simulation program for CRC operations.40 CRC-STEP runs on Arena® simulation software
and uses a Microsoft Excel® interface for data entry and export (Figure 13).

B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
Figure 13: CRC-STEP Interface

CRC-STEP is a planning tool that enables users to run CRC simulations to generate throughput
statistics (e.g., total throughput per hour, station wait times) and identify potential bottlenecks or
resource shortages. This information enables planners to refine their CRC plans prior to drills,
exercises, or activation. CRC-STEP is preset with default service times and simulation parameters.
However, users can customize these parameters for each simulation, further tailoring the results to
their particular planning specifications. Table 2 lists basic and advanced input parameters that
users can adjust.
More information about CRC-STEP and instructions for using the program can be found online at:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/crc/simulation.asp.

40 CRC-STEP can be accessed at http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/crc/simulation.asp.

Page G-2

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Table 2: CRC-STEP Input Parameters

Basic Input Parameters
Arrival Rate
-

Advanced Input Parameters
Service Times

How many people arrive each hour

-

Available Staff
-

Number of CRC staff

Staffing Category
-

Available Instrumentation and Facilities
-

Number of handheld radiation survey
meters
Number of portal monitors
Number of showers/cleaning stations

Concurrent Registrations
-

Time allotted for each step of the
process

-

Worker type (e.g., radiation staff,
medical staff, general staff)
Contamination rates
Percent of arrivals who are
contaminated

Activate/Deactivate Processes

How many people can be registered at
the same time by one staff member

-

A
B
C

Turn specific steps on/off depending
on CRC layout and staffing

D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page G-3

RealOpt-CRC
RealOpt-CRC is an optimization program for CRC operations developed by CDC and the Georgia
Institute of Technology.41 RealOpt-CRC allows emergency planners to analyze resource allocation in
real-time and run trials to identify optimum staffing for the CRC.

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
Figure 14: RealOpt-CRC Interface

H

RealOpt-CRC allows emergency planners to

I




J






design customized and efficient CRC process flows.
assess current resources and determine minimum needs to conduct population
monitoring.
determine optimal labor and instrumentation resources, and provide the most efficient
placement of staff throughout the process.
determine the number of centers and number of shifts needed to complete the screening
for the affected population.
determine the best operations performance under a given resource limitation (e.g.,
limited radiation survey meters, limited personnel).
conduct virtual drills and design emergency exercises with a variety of screening
scenarios.

More information about RealOpt-CRC and instructions for using the program can be found online at:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/crc/simulation.asp.

41 RealOpt-CRC can be accessed at http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/crc/simulation.asp.

Page G-4

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

APPENDIX H: SAMPLE COMMUNITY RECEPTION
CENTER STAFFING PLAN

Appendix H
Sample Community Reception Center Staffing Plan
Community Reception Centers (CRCs) must have sufficient staff, both technical and nontechnical, to
manage the centers for several days or weeks. Each CRC must have staff members and equipment
capable of





A

detecting contamination through beta/gamma portal monitors.
monitoring for general contamination using handheld radiation survey meters.
fielding questions and addressing all concerns.
distributing incident and follow-up information.

B

Technical staff members who are competent in the use of radiation survey meters must be available
for monitoring. Additional staff will be necessary for processing and decontamination. One or more
clinicians will likely be needed at each CRC to provide medical assessments and refer those who
need it for additional medical care.
Many community public health departments have established relationships with local Medical
Reserve Corps (MRC) units. The MRC is comprised of both medical and nonmedical volunteers
capable of providing assistance during public health emergencies.42 MRC volunteers are usually
trained to staff PODs, and they can also assist with staffing CRCs. It is prudent for MRC units to also
recruit health physicists or other radiation safety professionals as volunteers.
The Planning Guidance for Response to a Nuclear Detonation recommends that planners should
identify radiation protection professionals in their community and encourage them to volunteer and
register in a local or state health volunteer program.43 Through a program administered by the
Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors, Inc. (CRCPD), a number of states have
established a Radiation Response Volunteer Corps (RRVC) to assist local responders with population
monitoring and public shelter operations.44 The RRVC units work closely with the state health
volunteer programs.

C
D
E
F
G
H

An Example

I

Consider the following staffing needs for each shift. For certain positions (e.g., contamination
screening staff), consider shorter (4–6 hour) shifts to minimize physical and mental fatigue. The
following staffing and equipment requirements were developed using CRC-STEP (see Appendix G)
and are recommended for processing 350 people per hour. The staffing table does not include CRC

J

42 For more information on the Medical Reserve Corps, see www.medicalreservecorps.gov/HomePage.

For
information on POD operations, see Point of Dispensing (POD) Operations Manual, Philadelphia Department of
Public Health, Division of Disease Control, Emergency Preparedness and Bioterrorism Program, 2008,
available at www.naccho.org/toolbox/_toolbox/POD%20operations%20manual_1.pdf. Also see archived CDC
Webcasts, Mass Antibiotic Dispensing: Streamlining POD Design and Operations, available at
http://www2a.cdc.gov/tceonline/registration/detailpage.asp?res_id=1863, and Mass Antibiotic Dispensing:
Taking the Guesswork out of POD Design, available at
http://www2a.cdc.gov/tceonline/registration/detailpage.asp?res_id=1518.

43 Homeland Security Council (HSC) Interagency Policy Coordination Subcommittee for Preparedness &

Response to Radiological and Nuclear Threats (SubIPC). Planning Guidance for Response to a Nuclear
Detonation: Second Edition. June 2010. Washington, D.C.
44 Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors, Inc. (CRCPD). A Plan for Incorporating Local Volunteer

Radiation Professionals into Existing Health Volunteer Programs to Assist in Population Monitoring. March
2011, available at www.crcpd.org/Homeland_Security/RRVC_FinalReport.pdf.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page H-1

management or incident command staff, and the simulation assumes registration staff can
accommodate two concurrent registrations at a time.
Table 3: CRC Staffing Chart

Name

A
B
C
D
E
F
G

Staff

Initial Sorting Staff

10

Contamination Screening Staff

14

Wash Staff

10

Registration Staff

21

Radiation Dose Assessment Staff

5

Discharge Staff

5

TOTAL

65

This simulation assumes 10% of the people arriving at the CRC are contaminated and that staff are
equipped with adequate contamination screening and decontamination resources, as listed in Table
4. Each CRC should have protocols in place for transporting patients in need of urgent medical care
to hospitals or alternate care sites. In addition, it is prudent to plan for buses and bus drivers who
can provide transportation on a priority schedule to and from the CRCs for those who need such
transportation.
Table 4: CRC Equipment Resources

Equipment

Purpose

Location

Number

I

Alarming Dosimeters

High Contamination
Screening

Initial Sorting

J

Handheld Radiation Survey
Meters

Partial-Body Contamination
Screening

Contamination Screening

4

Post-Decon Screening

Wash Station

4

Portal Monitors

Whole-Body Contamination
Screening

Contamination Screening

2

Showers/Cleaning Stations

Decontamination

Wash Station

6

H

Page H-2

10
(1 per staff)

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Supplies
The following list contains some suggested items that would be needed at a CRC. This is not
intended to be a complete listing of all needed supplies.
Contamination control supplies







Materials for constructing signs or instruction posters
Barriers (stanchions and rope)
Step-off pads (tacky mats)
Plastic bags (variety of sizes)
Butcher paper (or absorbent floor covering such as disposable painting drop cloths)
Plastic sheeting

A
B

Personal protective equipment (PPE)










C

Scrubs
Coveralls (e.g., Tyvek®) or waterproof surgical gowns
Plastic (vinyl, nitrile) examination gloves
Disposable shoe covers
Surgical masks
N-95 masks
Face shields
Duct tape
Masking tape

D
E
F

Personal decontamination equipment

















G

Moist towels or disposable wipes
Paper towels
Large plastic bags (a variety of sizes to hold clothing)
Zipper-type bags for small personal items
Adhesive labels
Soap (mild)
Shampoo (no conditioner)
Baby shampoo
Waterless hand cleaner
Plastic sponges
Soft nail brushes
Towels
Clothing items, such as coveralls or scrubs for people to wear as they exit showers
(Various sizes are needed including very large and children’s sizes.)
Sanitary garments, such as diapers for children of various ages.
Shoes, sandals, or shoe coverings
Blankets or heaters for warmth (Note: Heaters should not blow air across a potentially
contaminated area.)

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page H-3

H
I
J

Forms and telecommunications equipment






A

Informational fact sheets to distribute to people at the CRC
Record forms
Notebooks
Telephones, cell phones, and fax machines
Computers (laptops) and Internet connectivity (if possible)
Photocopiers or scanners (Copying driver licenses or other forms of photo identification
with current information may expedite the registry process.)

Sample collection
B
C
D
E
F
G
H






Radiation detection and measurement equipment
Note: These instruments require periodic calibration and maintenance. For specific information on
these instruments and their maintenance requirements, consult with health physics experts in your
state radiation control program.




Geiger-Mueller (GM) pancake survey meters
Handheld alpha contamination monitors (only if alpha contamination is suspected)
Beta/gamma portal monitors

Miscellaneous supplies




I
J

Appropriate administrative forms (e.g., consent forms)
Urine sample collection kits
Blood sample collection kits
Chain-of-custody documentation







Page H-4

Large garbage bags
55-gallon waste drums
Folding chairs (At various places in the facility, folding chairs should be available in
temporary waiting areas. Some people, particularly the elderly, may find it difficult to
stand for an hour or more until they get cleared through the monitoring process.)
Drinking water
First aid kits
Defibrillator
Portable toilet facilities (outside area only)
Portable sinks or tubs (outside area only)

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

APPENDIX I: PHARMACEUTICAL COUNTERMEASURES

Appendix I
Pharmaceutical Countermeasures
There are several drugs that can be used to treat patients who are internally contaminated with
certain radionuclides or who are externally exposed to radiation. The decision to administer such
drugs is a medical one that must be made by appropriate medical authorities. However, public
health planners can benefit from a basic understanding of what these drugs can do and what their
limitations are.

A

As part of the planning process, public health authorities should consult with other experts and
evaluate the need, logistical requirements, and priority for administration of prophylactic or
decorporation agents. Most importantly, planners should review the decision-making process
needed to make these clinical judgments in a mass casualty radiation emergency.

B

This appendix provides an overview of four (4) pharmaceutical radiation countermeasures:

C






Potassium iodide
Prussian blue
DTPA45 (calcium and zinc)
Filgrastim (Neupogen®)

D

Potassium iodide (KI) is used to keep the thyroid from taking up radioactive iodine and must be
taken before or immediately after exposure to radioactive iodine. KI is approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) for this use. Prussian blue and DTPA are used to treat internal
contamination and are approved by the FDA for this use. Filgrastim can be used to treat acute
radiation syndrome (ARS). Although this drug is commonly used to treat patients undergoing
radiotherapy and chemotherapy procedures, its use to treat ARS patients is not yet approved by the
FDA.
For more detailed descriptions of these drugs, dosing requirements, and other clinical information
and related fact sheets, you may refer to the following websites:





U.S. Food and Drug Administration:
http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/EmergencyPreparedness/BioterrorismandDrugPreparedness/
ucm063807.htm
Radiation Emergency Medical Management (REMM) – Guidance on Diagnosis and
Treatment for Healthcare Providers
www.remm.nlm.gov/
U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/
REAC/TS
http://orise.orau.gov/reacts/

In addition, the National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements (NCRP) has published
an authoritative report on medical management of internal contamination.46 This NCRP report
includes prophylaxis and decorporation therapy recommendations for an extended list of
radionuclides.

45 Diethylenetriamene pentaacetate.
46 NCRP (2008). National Council on Radiation Protection and Measurements, Management of Persons

Accidentally Contaminated with Radionuclides, Report No. 165, December 2008.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page I-1

E
F
G
H
I
J

Potassium Iodide (KI)
KI is a prophylactic or blocking agent that comes in the form of a tablet. It protects the thyroid gland
against absorption of radioactive iodine. It is important to note that KI can be effective only when
radioactive iodine is a contaminant of concern. It offers no protection for other radionuclides. It also
does not protect against external exposure to radiation, even that from radioactive iodine.

A
B
C
D

There is a finite period of time immediately before and after inhaling or ingesting radioactive iodine
during which KI can be effective. Often, the best measure of protection is to avoid the radioactive
material in the first place. Protective measures that public health authorities may recommend
include evacuation or seeking shelter. When it is warranted, they may advise against consumption
of milk or other food products that could be contaminated with radioactive iodine. KI is usually
regarded as a potential supplementary measure of protection, not a primary one, even in cases of
radioactive iodine contamination.
Public health officials in states with operating nuclear power plants and communities surrounding
nuclear power plants are already familiar with KI and its potential use in case of an off-site release of
radioactive iodine from the power plants. Planners in states without nuclear power plants can
consult colleagues in other states about how to incorporate KI in their emergency plans. The
National Academy of Sciences has published guidance for the distribution of KI in a nuclear
incident.47

E

Prussian Blue

F

Prussian blue is used to treat people internally contaminated with radioactive cesium and thallium.48
It binds to radioactive cesium or thallium in the gut and speeds up its excretion from the body
through feces. Prussian blue is administered orally and comes in the form of a capsule.

G

Prussian blue is not effective for radionuclides other than cesium or thallium. It also does not
protect against external radiation, including radiation from cesium and thallium.

H

Prussian blue is technically a dye, and some formulations have industrial or artistic applications in
the form of paint, dye, or stain. For administrating to people, use only the FDA-approved
formulations.

I

DTPA

J

DTPA is used to treat people internally contaminated with plutonium, americium, and/or curium. It
acts by chelating (or binding) these radionuclides in the blood stream and speeding up their
excretion from the body through urine. Although an oral formulation of DTPA is under development,
the only formulation available at this time needs to be administered by intravenous injection.
Therefore, providing this drug to a large number of contaminated or presumptively contaminated
people may present logistical challenges, especially in a resource-depleted environment.
DTPA comes in two forms: calcium (Ca-DTPA) and zinc (Zn-DTPA). When given within the first day
after internal contamination has occurred, Ca-DTPA is about 10 times more effective than Zn-DTPA
at chelating plutonium, americium, and curium. After 24 hours have passed, Ca-DTPA and Zn-DTPA
are equally effective in chelating these radioactive materials. As is usual with these types of drugs,
there are additional considerations for children and pregnant or breastfeeding women.
Chelating agents work best when given shortly after radioactive materials have entered the body.
The more quickly the radioactive material is removed from the body, the fewer and less serious the
47 Distribution and Administration of Potassium Iodide in the Event of a Nuclear Incident, National Academies

Press, 2004, available at http://books.nap.edu/catalog.php?record_id=10868.
48 Prussian blue has also been used to treat contamination with nonradioactive thallium (once an ingredient of

rat poison).

Page I-2

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

health effects will be. After 24 hours, plutonium, americium, and curium are more difficult to
chelate. However, DTPA can still work to remove these radioactive materials from the body several
days or even weeks after a person has been internally contaminated.
DTPA does not protect against external radiation, including that from plutonium, americium, and
curium.
Filgrastim (Neupogen®)
This drug is different from the previous three drugs in that it is not used to treat internal
contamination with any radionuclide. Filgrastim belongs to a class of drugs known as colony
stimulating factors, or CSF, and it is used to treat an adverse effect of acute radiation syndrome—
bone marrow suppression. This is a condition in which the body is not producing enough blood cells
(red cells, white cells, and platelets). A low white blood cell count makes people susceptible to
infections.

A
B

Filgrastim can stimulate the bone marrow to produce more white blood cells. It is administered
intravenously.

C

Public health officials should know that although Filgrastim is stored in the Strategic National
Stockpile for this purpose, it has not been approved by the FDA for the treatment of bone marrow
suppression following acute radiation exposure. Filgrastim could be administered to victims of acute
radiation syndrome if an Emergency Use Authorization is issued by the FDA.49

D

None of these pharmaceutical countermeasures are needed for low levels of exposure to radiation or
low levels of internal contamination. When the amount of internal contamination is deemed
medically significant (see Appendix E), medical treatment is considered. The estimation of the levels
of exposure or contamination is made by the appropriate radiation protection and control authority.
The decision whether to treat people with any of these pharmaceutical countermeasures needs to be
made only by appropriate medical authorities.
In the aftermath of a nuclear or radiological incident, the emphasis should be on minimizing public
exposure to radiation and minimizing the chances of radionuclides entering the body by providing
timely and appropriate recommendations for protective actions the public can take. When
prevention of exposure or contamination is possible, the need for pharmaceutical countermeasures
can potentially be avoided.

E
F
G
H
I
J

49 For more information on the FDA’s Emergency Use Authorization of medical products, see

www.fda.gov/RegulatoryInformation/Guidances/ucm125127.htm.

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page I-3

APPENDIX J: ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

Appendix J
Additional Resources
This resource list is not intended to be all-inclusive. A number of websites are identified that may be
helpful to public health planners as they address the issue of population monitoring in their
communities:
A
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation

B

770-488-3800 (for questions about this guide)
770-488-7100 (for emergencies only)

C

ATSDR Rapid Response Registry

D

http://www.atsdr.cdc.gov/rapidresponse/
E
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Office of the Assistant Secretary for
Preparedness and Response (ASPR)

F

http://www.phe.gov/preparedness/pages/default.aspx

G

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
http://www.epa.gov/radiation/index.html

H

U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)

I

http://www.fda.gov/Drugs/EmergencyPreparedness/BioterrorismandDrugPreparedn
ess/ucm063807.htm
Conference of Radiation Control Program Directors, Inc. (CRCPD)
http://www.crcpd.org/
To identify the radiation control authority in your state, contact CRCPD at 502-227-4543 or visit:
http://www.crcpd.org/Map/default.aspx.
Radiation Emergency Assistance Center/Training Site (REAC/TS)
http://orise.orau.gov/reacts/default.aspx
865-576-3131
865-576-1005 (after hours)

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

Page J-1

J

Radiation Emergency Medical Management (REMM)
http://www.remm.nlm.gov/
Responder Knowledge Base (RKB)
RKB is a Web-based information service for the emergency responder community funded by the
U.S. Department of Homeland Security (DHS).
https://www.llis.dhs.gov/knowledgebase

A
B

National Alliance for Radiation Readiness (NARR)

C

The NARR is an interagency collaboration among key stakeholders in public health
preparedness, radiation control, and emergency management that maintains a clearing house of
documents and resources used in radiation emergency planning and exercises.
http://www.radiationready.org

D
E
F
G
H
I
J

Page J-2

Population Monitoring in Radiation Emergencies, 2nd Ed.

