Emergency Management Pocket Guide

This pocket guide is designed for clinicians, including
physicians, nurses, and other health care professionals,
who will provide emergency care following a radiological
event. It should be used as a supplement to training and
practice drills.

ADDITIONAL RESOURCES

Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC)
Phone: 1 (800) 311-3435
Web: emergency.cdc.gov/radiation
Radiation Emergency Assistance Center/Training Site
(REAC/TS)
Phone: (865) 576-1005
Web: www.orau.gov/reacts

RADIOLOGICAL
EMERGENCIES

Emergency Management
Pocket Guide For Clinicians

Armed Forces Radiobiology Research Institute,
Medical Radiobiology Team
Phone: (301) 295-0530
Web: www.usuhs.edu/afrri
American Association of Poison Control
Phone: 1 (800) 222-1222
Web: www.aapcc.org
State and Local Public Health Departments
(record below):
Local Public Health Department:
State Public Health Department:

RADIATION PRINCIPLES

Radiation cannot be seen, felt, smelled, or tasted.
A radiological survey with specialized equipment is
the only way to confirm the presence of radioactive
materials. If a terrorist event involves the use of
radioactive material, both patient exposure and
contamination must be assessed.
Exposure occurs when a person is near a radiation
source. People exposed to a source of radiation can
suffer radiation illness if their dose is high enough, but
they do not become radioactive. For example, an x-ray
machine is a source of radiation exposure, but a person
does not become radioactive following a chest x-ray.
Contamination occurs externally when loose particles
of radioactive material are deposited on surfaces,
skin, or clothing. Internal contamination can occur if
radioactive particles are inhaled, ingested, or lodged in
an open wound.
Contaminated people should be decontaminated as
soon as possible. People who have been exposed to
radiation but are not contaminated with radioactive
material do not need to be decontaminated.

MEDICAL MANAGEMENT PRINCIPLES

• It is highly unlikely that radioactivity associated with a
contaminated patient would pose a significant health
risk to care providers.
• In certain rare instances, the presence of imbedded
radioactive fragments or large amounts of external
contamination might require decontamination to be
expedited.
• However, addressing contamination issues should not
delay treatment of life-threatening injuries.
• Contaminated patients with life-threatening injuries can
be wrapped in sheets for transport to treatment areas.

STAFF PROTECTION GUIDELINES

Establish an ad hoc triage area.
• Base the location on the pre-established disaster plan
and the anticipated number of casualties.
• Establish a contaminated area and clean area
separated by a buffer zone.
• Survey your body with a radiation meter when entering
and exiting a clean area.
• Remove your contaminated outer garments when
leaving the contaminated area.
Use universal precautions to protect staff.
• Follow standard guidelines for protection from
microbiological contamination.
• Surgical or N95 masks should be adequate in most
situations,. In the triage pre-decontamination area,
an air-purifying respirator may be necessary when
the risk of external contamination with radioactive
material is high
• Survey hands and clothing at frequent intervals with a
radiation meter.
• Due to fetal sensitivity to radiation, assign pregnant
staff to other duties.

DECONTAMINATION GUIDELINES

Survey the patient with a radiation meter.
• Perform survey using consistent technique and trained
personnel. Include radiation safety officers on the
response team.
• Note exceptionally large amounts of surface or
imbedded radioactive material.
• Handle radioactive objects with forceps and seal in
lead containers.
• Record location and level of any contamination found.
Remove patient clothing carefully to avoid spread of
contamination.
• This might remove up to 90% of radioactive particles.
• Double-bag clothing following radioactive hazardous
waste guidelines, label, and save as evidence.
• Repeat patient survey and record levels.
Cleanse contaminated areas.
• Wash wounds first with saline.
• If facial contamination is present, flush eyes, nose, and
ears with saline and rinse mouth.
• Cleanse skin with soap and water beginning with areas
of highest contamination.
• Do not irritate the skin.
• Resurvey and note levels.
• Repeat washing until survey indicates radiation level
is no more than twice background or the level remains
unchanged.
• Cover wounds with water-proof dressing.
• Dispose of waste water through normal channels.
• Consider establishing separate shower area.

RADIATION-RELATED ILLNESS/INJURY

Acute radiation syndrome (ARS)
ARS occurs when high doses of radiation are delivered
rapidly to large portions of the body. The most probable
terrorist events, such as the use of a dirty bomb, will
likely generate low levels of radiation exposure. If ARS
cases are seen, small casualty numbers are likely.
• Time of exposure, distance from radioactive source,
and duration of exposure should be noted.
• Patients can present individually if exposed to
radioactive sources hidden in the community.
• Symptoms can be immediate or delayed, mild or
severe, based on radiation dose.
• Nausea, vomiting may occur minutes to days after
exposure. Time of onset and duration is a major factor
in diagnosis and dose estimation.
• Early onset of vomiting followed by symptoms of bone
marrow suppression, gastrointestinal destruction,
and/or cardiovascular/central nervous system effects
is indicative of acute illness.
• During the latent stage a patient could look healthy.
Treatment
• Perform sequential CBCs with differential to assess
progressive declines in lymphocyte levels.
• Monitor for fluid and electrolyte balance and evidence
of hemodynamic instability.
• Treat symptomatically with focus on prevention of
infection, including antibiotics.

• Consider Cytokines such as Neupogen, Neulasta
or Leukine.
• Perform surgical interventions within the first 48 hours
or delay until after hematopoietic recovery.
• Download biodosimetry dose assessment software
from www.afrri.usuhs.mil.

• Assessment could include analysis of urine, blood,
and fecal samples or whole body counts. Consult with
radiation experts.
• Radiation
experts
could
recommend
early
administration of radionuclide-specific decorporation
agents such as Prussian Blue, or DTPA.

Cutaneous radiation injury (CRI)
CRI is acute radiation injury to the skin.
• Skin damage can manifest within hours, days, or weeks
after radiation exposure.
• Transient itching, tingling, erythema, or edema could
be seen within hours or days of exposure, and is
usually followed by a latent period.
• Lesions are not seen for weeks to months postexposure, but then can be debilitating or even
life-threatening.
• Delayed occurrence of lesions is a differentiating
factor from thermal burns.
• Note time of occurrence of signs and symptoms and
progressive changes in appearance.
• Treat localized injuries symptomatically, focusing on
pain and infection control.

Psychosocial issues
• In urban areas hundreds to thousands may seek care.
Many could require radiation screening and decon
tamination while a minority could have significant
exposure.
• Psychogenic illness symptoms such as nausea or
vomiting may manifest.
• Vomiting due to radiation exposure is usually recurrent
rather than episodic.
• Include mental health professionals on team.
• Have radiation exposure fact sheets available for
patients and families.
• Pregnant patients require special counseling.
• Separate areas for radiation screening and
decontamination could be needed for mass casualties.

Internal contamination
Internal contamination should be considered if
persistently high survey readings are noted following
decontamination. Internal contamination generally
does not cause early symptoms.
• Nose, or mouth contamination can indicate inhalation
or ingestion.

MANAGEMENT OF DECEASED

• A patient exposed to a lethal dose of radiation without
contamination is not radioactive and no special
precautions are needed.
• Special precautions are necessary for contaminated
deceased.
• For information regarding handling decedents: https://
emergency.cdc.gov/radiation/examiners-coroners.asp

CS274749D

Table 1. Estimation of External Radiation Dose
Related to Onset of Vomiting*
Vomiting Post
Incident

Estimated
Dose

Degree of
ARS

Less than
10 minutes

> 8 Gy

Lethal

10-30
minutes

6-8 Gy

Very Severe

Less than
1 hour

4-6 Gy

Severe

1-2 Hours

2-4 Gy

Moderate

More than 2
hours after

Less than 2 Gy

Mild

* For acute external exposures only. Gray (Gy) is the SI unit of
measurement for radiation absorbed dose.
Adapted from: Berger Me, Leonard RB, Ricks RC, Wiley AL,
Lowry Pc. Hospital Triage in the First 24 Hours After a Nuclear or
Radiological Disaster. REAC/TS (Radiation Emergency Assistance
Center/Training Site); https://www.orau.gov/reacts: 2004.

Andrews Lymphocyte Nomogram

From Andrews GA, Auxier JA, Lushbaugh CC. The Importance
of Dosimetry to the Medical Management of Persons Exposed
to High Levels of Radiation. In Personal Dosimetry for Radiation
Accidents. Vienna: International Atomic Energy Agency; 1965.
Pocket Guide Web Access:
http://emergency.cdc.gov/radiation
Questions or requests for additional copies of Pocket Guide:
Go to www.cdc.gov/pubs

