21 8 PP = 1 1 . 1 9 M M S PI NE

Considerations in the Development of a Protection Strategy for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency

I N T E R N AT I O N A L AT O M I C E N E R GY AG E N C Y
VIENNA

EPR- PROTECTION
S T R AT E G Y

2020

Considerations in
the Development of
a Protection Strategy
for a Nuclear or
Radiological Emergency

@

E M E R G E N C Y P R E PA R E D N E S S
AND RESPONSE

2020

EPR - PROTECTI ON
S TR ATEGY 2020

EPR- PROTECTION
S T R AT E G Y

IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS AND RELATED PUBLICATIONS
IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
Under the terms of Article III of its Statute, the IAEA is authorized to establish or adopt
standards of safety for protection of health and minimization of danger to life and property, and
to provide for the application of these standards.
The publications by means of which the IAEA establishes standards are issued in the
IAEA Safety Standards Series. This series covers nuclear safety, radiation safety, transport
safety and waste safety. The publication categories in the series are Safety Fundamentals,
Safety Requirements and Safety Guides.
site

Information on the IAEA’s safety standards programme is available on the IAEA Internet
https://www.iaea.org/resources/safety-standards

The site provides the texts in English of published and draft safety standards. The texts
of safety standards issued in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish, the IAEA Safety
Glossary and a status report for safety standards under development are also available. For
further information, please contact the IAEA at: Vienna International Centre, PO Box 100,
1400 Vienna, Austria.
All users of IAEA safety standards are invited to inform the IAEA of experience in their
use (e.g. as a basis for national regulations, for safety reviews and for training courses) for the
purpose of ensuring that they continue to meet users’ needs. Information may be provided via
the IAEA Internet site or by post, as above, or by email to Official.Mail@iaea.org.
RELATED PUBLICATIONS
The IAEA provides for the application of the standards and, under the terms of Articles III
and VIII.C of its Statute, makes available and fosters the exchange of information relating
to peaceful nuclear activities and serves as an intermediary among its Member States for this
purpose.
Reports on safety in nuclear activities are issued as Safety Reports, which provide
practical examples and detailed methods that can be used in support of the safety standards.
Other safety related IAEA publications are issued as Emergency Preparedness and
Response publications, Radiological Assessment Reports, the International Nuclear Safety
Group’s INSAG Reports, Technical Reports and TECDOCs. The IAEA also issues reports
on radiological accidents, training manuals and practical manuals, and other special safety
related publications.
Security related publications are issued in the IAEA Nuclear Security Series.
The IAEA Nuclear Energy Series comprises informational publications to encourage
and assist research on, and the development and practical application of, nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. It includes reports and guides on the status of and advances in technology,
and on experience, good practices and practical examples in the areas of nuclear power, the
nuclear fuel cycle, radioactive waste management and decommissioning.

CONSIDERATIONS IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF A PROTECTION
STRATEGY FOR A NUCLEAR OR
RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCY

The following States are Members of the International Atomic Energy Agency:
AFGHANISTAN
ALBANIA
ALGERIA
ANGOLA
ANTIGUA AND BARBUDA
ARGENTINA
ARMENIA
AUSTRALIA
AUSTRIA
AZERBAIJAN
BAHAMAS
BAHRAIN
BANGLADESH
BARBADOS
BELARUS
BELGIUM
BELIZE
BENIN
BOLIVIA, PLURINATIONAL
STATE OF
BOSNIA AND HERZEGOVINA
BOTSWANA
BRAZIL
BRUNEI DARUSSALAM
BULGARIA
BURKINA FASO
BURUNDI
CAMBODIA
CAMEROON
CANADA
CENTRAL AFRICAN
REPUBLIC
CHAD
CHILE
CHINA
COLOMBIA
COMOROS
CONGO
COSTA RICA
CÔTE D’IVOIRE
CROATIA
CUBA
CYPRUS
CZECH REPUBLIC
DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC
OF THE CONGO
DENMARK
DJIBOUTI
DOMINICA
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
ECUADOR
EGYPT
EL SALVADOR
ERITREA
ESTONIA
ESWATINI
ETHIOPIA
FIJI
FINLAND
FRANCE
GABON

GEORGIA
GERMANY
GHANA
GREECE
GRENADA
GUATEMALA
GUYANA
HAITI
HOLY SEE
HONDURAS
HUNGARY
ICELAND
INDIA
INDONESIA
IRAN, ISLAMIC REPUBLIC OF
IRAQ
IRELAND
ISRAEL
ITALY
JAMAICA
JAPAN
JORDAN
KAZAKHSTAN
KENYA
KOREA, REPUBLIC OF
KUWAIT
KYRGYZSTAN
LAO PEOPLE’S DEMOCRATIC
REPUBLIC
LATVIA
LEBANON
LESOTHO
LIBERIA
LIBYA
LIECHTENSTEIN
LITHUANIA
LUXEMBOURG
MADAGASCAR
MALAWI
MALAYSIA
MALI
MALTA
MARSHALL ISLANDS
MAURITANIA
MAURITIUS
MEXICO
MONACO
MONGOLIA
MONTENEGRO
MOROCCO
MOZAMBIQUE
MYANMAR
NAMIBIA
NEPAL
NETHERLANDS
NEW ZEALAND
NICARAGUA
NIGER
NIGERIA
NORTH MACEDONIA
NORWAY

OMAN
PAKISTAN
PALAU
PANAMA
PAPUA NEW GUINEA
PARAGUAY
PERU
PHILIPPINES
POLAND
PORTUGAL
QATAR
REPUBLIC OF MOLDOVA
ROMANIA
RUSSIAN FEDERATION
RWANDA
SAINT LUCIA
SAINT VINCENT AND
THE GRENADINES
SAN MARINO
SAUDI ARABIA
SENEGAL
SERBIA
SEYCHELLES
SIERRA LEONE
SINGAPORE
SLOVAKIA
SLOVENIA
SOUTH AFRICA
SPAIN
SRI LANKA
SUDAN
SWEDEN
SWITZERLAND
SYRIAN ARAB REPUBLIC
TAJIKISTAN
THAILAND
TOGO
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO
TUNISIA
TURKEY
TURKMENISTAN
UGANDA
UKRAINE
UNITED ARAB EMIRATES
UNITED KINGDOM OF
GREAT BRITAIN AND
NORTHERN IRELAND
UNITED REPUBLIC
OF TANZANIA
UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
URUGUAY
UZBEKISTAN
VANUATU
VENEZUELA, BOLIVARIAN
REPUBLIC OF
VIET NAM
YEMEN
ZAMBIA
ZIMBABWE

The Agency’s Statute was approved on 23 October 1956 by the Conference on the Statute of the
IAEA held at United Nations Headquarters, New York; it entered into force on 29 July 1957.
The Headquarters of the Agency are situated in Vienna. Its principal objective is “to accelerate and enlarge
the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and prosperity throughout the world’’.

EPR-PROTECTION STRATEGY (2020)

CONSIDERATIONS IN THE
DEVELOPMENT OF A PROTECTION
STRATEGY FOR A NUCLEAR OR
RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCY

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
VIENNA, 2021

COPYRIGHT NOTICE
All IAEA scientific and technical publications are protected by the terms of
the Universal Copyright Convention as adopted in 1952 (Berne) and as revised
in 1972 (Paris). The copyright has since been extended by the World Intellectual
Property Organization (Geneva) to include electronic and virtual intellectual
property. Permission to use whole or parts of texts contained in IAEA publications
in printed or electronic form must be obtained and is usually subject to royalty
agreements. Proposals for non-commercial reproductions and translations are
welcomed and considered on a case-by-case basis. Enquiries should be addressed
to the IAEA Publishing Section at:
Marketing and Sales Unit, Publishing Section
International Atomic Energy Agency
Vienna International Centre
PO Box 100
1400 Vienna, Austria
fax: +43 1 26007 22529
tel.: +43 1 2600 22417
email: sales.publications@iaea.org
www.iaea.org/publications

For further information on this publication, please contact:
Incident and Emergency Centre
International Atomic Energy Agency
Vienna International Centre
PO Box 100
1400 Vienna, Austria
Email: Official.Mail@iaea.org

CONSIDERATIONS IN THE DEVELOPMENT OF A PROTECTION
STRATEGY FOR A NUCLEAR OR RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCY
IAEA, VIENNA, 2021
EPR-Protection Strategy (2020)
ISSN 2518–685X
© IAEA, 2021
Printed by the IAEA in Austria
April 2021

FOREWORD
In March 2015, the IAEA’s Board of Governors approved IAEA Safety Standards Series No.
GSR Part 7, Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency, which was
jointly sponsored by 13 international organizations. GSR Part 7 establishes requirements for an
adequate level of preparedness for and response to a nuclear or radiological emergency,
irrespective of the initiator of the emergency. As part of these safety requirements, governments
are required to ensure that “protection strategies are developed, justified and optimized at the
preparedness stage for taking protective actions and other response actions effectively in a
nuclear or radiological emergency”, which is also a requirement of the IAEA Safety Standards
Series No. GSR Part 3, Radiation Protection and Safety of Radiation Sources: International
Basic Safety Standards.
In line with these requirements, the IAEA General Conference in 2018, in resolution
GC(62)/RES/6, encouraged Member States “to ensure that radiation protection strategies are
developed, justified and optimized to enable effective protective actions to be taken in a timely
manner, during a nuclear or radiological emergency”. Moreover, it requested the Secretariat to
provide assistance, upon request, to Member States in this regard.
This publication within the Emergency Preparedness and Response Series is intended to assist
Member States in the application of Requirement 5 of GSR Part 7 and Requirement 44 of
GSR Part 3. It provides practical guidance on and a stepwise approach to the development,
justification and optimization of a protection strategy for a nuclear or radiological emergency,
the implementation of the concepts of reference levels and generic criteria in the strategy, and
the implementation of the strategy during an emergency response. It also elaborates on the
planning basis necessary to support the development of a justified and optimized protection
strategy as well as on the processes of justification and optimization to be applied by responsible
authorities in a State. Finally, this publication provides a template outline of a protection
strategy that can be used by States when developing their protection strategy and an example
of a protection strategy for postulated nuclear or radiological emergencies.
The IAEA officer responsible for this publication was S. Nestoroska Madjunarova of the
Incident and Emergency Centre.

EDITORIAL NOTE
This publication has been prepared from the original material as submitted by the contributors and has not been edited by the editorial
staff of the IAEA. The views expressed remain the responsibility of the contributors and do not necessarily represent the views of the
IAEA or its Member States.
Neither the IAEA nor its Member States assume any responsibility for consequences which may arise from the use of this publication.
This publication does not address questions of responsibility, legal or otherwise, for acts or omissions on the part of any person.
The use of particular designations of countries or territories does not imply any judgement by the publisher, the IAEA, as to the legal
status of such countries or territories, of their authorities and institutions or of the delimitation of their boundaries.
The mention of names of specific companies or products (whether or not indicated as registered) does not imply any intention to
infringe proprietary rights, nor should it be construed as an endorsement or recommendation on the part of the IAEA.
The authors are responsible for having obtained the necessary permission for the IAEA to reproduce, translate or use material from
sources already protected by copyrights.
The IAEA has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of URLs for external or third party Internet web sites referred to in this
publication and does not guarantee that any content on such web sites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.

CONTENTS
1.

INTRODUCTION ............................................................................................................ 1
1.1.
1.2.
1.3.
1.4.

2.

CONCEPT OF THE PROTECTION STRATEGY FOR A NUCLEAR OR
RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCY .................................................................................. 3
2.1.
2.2.
2.3.
2.4.

3.

Step-by-step approach for development of a protection strategy ..................... 31
Considerations for developing the protection strategy implied from
implementation ................................................................................................. 38

JUSTIFICATION AND OPTIMIZATION OF PROTECTION AND SAFETY .......... 43
5.1.
5.2.
5.3.
5.4.

6.

Goals of emergency response ........................................................................... 11
Planning basis ................................................................................................... 12
Hazard assessment ............................................................................................ 19

DEVELOPMENT OF A PROTECTION STRATEGY ................................................. 31
4.1
4.2.

5.

Background ......................................................................................................... 3
Concept of the protection strategy ...................................................................... 4
Place of the protection strategy among other relevant documents ..................... 8
Elements of the protection strategy .................................................................... 9

BASIS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A PROTECTION STRATEGY ................... 11
3.1.
3.2.
3.3.

4.

Background ......................................................................................................... 1
Objective ............................................................................................................. 1
Scope .................................................................................................................. 2
Structure.............................................................................................................. 2

Introduction ...................................................................................................... 43
Justification at the preparedness stage .............................................................. 46
Optimization at the preparedness stage ............................................................ 52
Justification and optimization in response........................................................ 60

CONSULTATION WITH INTERESTED PARTIES .................................................... 64
GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS .................................................................................. 64
6.2.
Consultation on the protection strategy during different phases ...................... 70
6.3.
Feedback on the consultation process and further improvement ..................... 75

APPENDIX I REFERENCE LEVEL AND GENERIC CRITERIA AND THEIR
APPLICATION WITHIN THE PROTECTION STRATEGY ........................ 76
APPENDIX II OUTLINE OF THE PROTECTION STRATEGY DOCUMENT .................. 82
APPENDIX III OVERVIEW OF KEY PROTECTIVE ACTIONS AND OTHER
RESPONSE ACTIONS .................................................................................... 87
REFERENCES ....................................................................................................................... 119
ANNEX I EXAMPLE PROTECTION STRATEGY FOR A NUCLEAR OR
RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCY ................................................................ 123
ANNEX II FACTORS FOR JUSTIFCATION AND OPTIMIZATION .............................. 204
ABBREVIATIONS ................................................................................................................ 207
CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW ........................................................... 208

1.

INTRODUCTION

1.1. Background
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 3, Radiation Protection and Safety of Radiation
Sources: International Basic Safety Standards [1], and No. GSR Part 7, Preparedness and
Response for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency [2], require Member States to “ensure
that protection strategies are developed, justified and optimized, at the preparedness stage,
for taking protective actions and other response actions effectively in a nuclear or
radiological emergency”.
The concept of the protection strategy, comprising a suite of justified and optimized
protective actions and other response actions, has evolved from the previously recommended
approach in which interventions, in terms of individual protective actions primarily, were
separately justified on the basis of the radiation dose (hereinafter referred to as the dose) that
is avertable by that action, using the concept of intervention levels. The concept of protection
strategy involves consideration of protective actions and other response actions, individually
and in combination, on the basis of the reference level and generic criteria, expressed in terms
of residual and projected or received doses, respectively.
The abovementioned safety standards provide for the development of a justified and
optimized protection strategy and the application of reference levels and generic criteria on
radiation protection grounds. However, these safety standards recognize the need for national
authorities to consider a range of factors and different impacts at the national level (possible
impacts on health as well as societal, economic, environmental and other impacts) to ensure
that emergency response actions are justified and optimized, taking account of radiation
protection considerations as well as a range of non-radiological factors and impacts.
The factors and impacts that are to be considered, and how responsible authorities can arrive
at a justified and optimized protection strategy, has not yet been addressed in detail.
Given that the combined use of reference levels and generic criteria within a protection
strategy is relatively new, Member States requested the IAEA to develop technical guidance
on the protection strategy and on the implementation of the reference levels and generic
criteria within the protection strategy, taking into account societal, economic and
environmental impacts as well as other factors and impacts.
These factors and impacts are expected to influence the final decision to be made by each
State on the values to be chosen for the reference level aimed to guide the optimization
process, and also on the national generic criteria aimed to guide the initiation of specific
protective actions and other response actions, taking into account those values recommended
in the IAEA safety standards on radiation protection grounds. These considerations have their
importance for both the preparedness stage and the emergency response and will impact the
final decisions on how best to approach the protection of populations in a nuclear or
radiological emergency.
1.2. Objective
This publication provides Member States with practical guidance and a stepwise approach for
the development, justification and optimization of a protection strategy for a nuclear or
radiological emergency, for the application of reference levels and generic criteria within the
protection strategy as well as on the implementation of the strategy during an emergency
response.

1

This publication also elaborates in more detail on the planning basis necessary to support the
development of a justified and optimized protection strategy as well as on the processes of
justification and optimization to be applied by responsible authorities in a State.
In addition, this publication provides a template outline of a protection strategy that can be
used by States when developing their protection strategy and examples of protection strategies
for postulated nuclear or radiological emergencies associated with facilities, activities and
sources in the five emergency preparedness categories (EPCs) described in the GSR Part 7
[2].
1.3. Scope
This publication is applicable to any nuclear or radiological emergency that could occur in
relation to a facility, an activity or a source, irrespective of the cause (i.e. be it nuclear safety
or nuclear security related).
The target audiences for this publication are decision makers (emergency managers),
emergency planners (at the facility, local, regional and national level), emergency response
coordinators, qualified experts/radiation protection officers (radiological assessors, technical
advisers to decision makers) and relevant staff of different response organizations at all levels
with roles and responsibilities in preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological
emergency.
Terms are used in this publication as defined in GSR Part 7 [2] and the IAEA Safety Glossary
[3].
1.4. Structure
This publication comprises of six sections. Section 2 elaborates on the concept of a protection
strategy for a nuclear or radiological emergency and the elements of the protection strategy.
Section 3 describes the basis for the development of a protection strategy while Section 4
provides a step-by-step approach for developing the strategy. Section 4 includes also
considerations for the implementation of the protection strategy to be considered during the
development of the strategy. Section 5 elaborates processes for justification and optimization
of the protection strategy. Section 6 addresses the consultation with the public and interested
parties in the context of development and implementation of the protection strategy.
Appendices provide discussion on the reference level and generic criteria and their application
within the protection strategy, template outline of a protection strategy, and an overview of
key protective actions and other response actions. Annexes provide example protection
strategy for postulated nuclear or radiological emergencies and list example factors and
considerations that are relevant for the processes of justification and optimization.

2

2.

CONCEPT OF THE PROTECTION STRATEGY FOR A NUCLEAR OR
RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCY

2.1. Background
Requirement 5 of GSR Part 7 [2] states: “Governments shall ensure that protection strategies
are developed, justified and optimized at the preparedness stage for taking protective actions
and other response actions effectively in a nuclear or radiological emergency.”
The protection strategy is required to be developed on the basis of the hazards identified and
the potential consequences of a nuclear or radiological emergency such that protective actions
and other response actions can be taken to achieve the goals of the emergency response
(stipulated in para. 3.2 of GSR Part 7 [2]) in an effective manner.
Paragraph 4.28 of GSR Part 7 [2] requires that the development of a protection strategy
includes, but is not limited to, the following:
1) “Consideration shall be given to actions to be taken to avoid or to minimize severe
deterministic effects and to reduce the risk of stochastic effects. Deterministic effects
shall be evaluated on the basis of relative biological effectiveness (RBE) weighted
absorbed dose to a tissue or organ. Stochastic effects in a tissue or organ shall be
evaluated on the basis of equivalent dose to the tissue or organ. The detriment associated
with the occurrence of stochastic effects in individuals in an exposed population shall be
evaluated on the basis of the effective dose.
2) A reference level expressed in terms of residual dose shall be set, typically as an effective
dose in the range 20–100 mSv, acute or annual, that includes dose contributions via all
exposure pathways. This reference level shall be used in conjunction with the goals of
emergency response (…) and the specific time frame in which particular goals are to be
achieved.
3) On the basis of the outcome of the justification and optimization of the protection
strategy, national generic criteria for taking protective actions and other response
actions, expressed in terms of projected dose or of dose that has been received, shall be
developed with account taken of the generic criteria in Appendix II [of GSR Part 7]. If
the national generic criteria for projected dose or received dose are exceeded, protective
actions and other response actions either individually or in combination, shall be
implemented.
4) Once the protection strategy has been justified and optimized and a set of national
criteria has been developed, pre-established operational criteria (conditions on the site,
emergency action levels (EALs) and operational intervention levels (OILs)) for initiating
the different parts of an emergency plan and for taking protective actions and other
response actions shall be derived from the generic criteria. Arrangements shall be
established in advance to revise these operational criteria, as appropriate, in the course
of a nuclear or radiological emergency, with account taken of the prevailing conditions
as they evolve.”
Paragraph 4.31 of GSR Part 7 [2] further requires that the protection strategy is implemented
safely and effectively in an emergency response through the implementation of emergency
arrangements. Such implementation of pre-established arrangements is related, but not limited
to, taking various protective actions and other response actions with the aim to avoid or
minimize severe deterministic effects and to reduce the risk of stochastic effects among
individuals as well as to mitigate non-radiological consequences. In addition, it relates to
activities taken to:

3

− Assess the effectiveness of the implemented protective actions and other response
actions and adjusting them as appropriate on the basis of prevailing conditions and
available information as well as the reference level expressed in terms of residual dose;
− Revise the protection strategy as necessary and its further implementation;
− Discontinue protective actions and other response actions when they are no longer
justified.
The various requirements mentioned imply that the protection strategy describes how the
objectives of an emergency response are achieved through the implementation of a justified
and optimized set of protective actions and other response actions on the basis of thoughtfully
defined dosimetric criteria that allow for effective protection and safety. The protection
strategy is developed at the preparedness stage and then implemented safely and effectively,
in response to an emergency, through the execution of pre-established emergency
arrangements (such as emergency plans and procedures). This concept of the protection
strategy, comprising a suite of justified and optimized protective actions and other response
actions, has evolved from the previously recommended approach [4, 5] in which interventions
(i.e. individual protective actions) were individually justified on the basis of the dose that is
avertable by that action, using the concept of intervention levels on the basis of the ICRP
recommendations valid at that time [6, 7]. Discussion on the reference level, generic criteria
and their application within the protection strategy, in line with the latest requirements and
recommendations, is provided in Appendix I.
However, currently there is no clarity to what the protection strategy actually is from a
practical point of view to assist States in identifying suitable means to apply these
requirements in their national emergency preparedness and response (EPR) framework and to
develop an adequate protection strategy. The situation is further complicated by the fact that
the term ‘protection strategy’ is commonly used to refer to both a framework and its
documentation, i.e. the same term is applied to:
 A framework under which the justified and optimized set of protective actions and other
response actions in an emergency response are implemented (through execution of preestablished emergency arrangements); and
 A document (or set of documents) that describes the goals to be achieved, the decision
making basis, and the set of justified and optimized emergency response actions that
comprise or set the framework.
This publication provides practical guidance to help States develop a suitable protection
strategy as a documentation that can serve as a framework under which the emergency
response is undertaken in a nuclear or radiological emergency. This section aims to bring
clarity to a concept of the protection strategy.
2.2. Concept of the protection strategy
The protection strategy is, in general terms, an outline of the national approach to a nuclear
and radiological emergency response to achieve the goals of emergency response. The
concept of protection strategy involves consideration of protective actions and other response
actions, individually and in combination, based on the reference level and generic criteria,
expressed in terms of residual and projected doses or received doses, respectively. Such
actions are further justified and optimized taking account of a range of non-radiological
considerations as well and are taken based on directly measurable or observable criteria (i.e.
operational criteria). As such, the protection strategy describes, in a comprehensive manner,
what needs to be achieved in response to a nuclear or radiological emergency in all its phases
(i.e. from the time the emergency is declared by the time the emergency is terminated) and

4

how the set objective or goals will be achieved through ensuring a justified and optimized set
of protective actions and other response actions are taken [8]. For large-scale emergencies, the
protection strategy may extend into the longer term, within the framework of an existing
exposure situation.
Most States already have emergency plans and other arrangements in place, most of which
were developed on the basis of the previous concepts contained in Refs [4‒7]. They were
intended to allow for an effective emergency response at the time and as such, elements of a
protection strategy are already in existence at national levels but spread out over a range of
various documentation (such as legislation, regulations, emergency plans at various levels,
procedures, processes in established management systems, checklists and technical
assessments). Such elements relate, but are not limited to, clearly set objectives to be met
during the emergency response, the basis upon which the decisions for emergency response
actions are taken, pre-planned set of emergency response actions for particular type of a
nuclear or radiological emergency and the means for adjusting the emergency response
actions to meet the prevailing circumstances.
The development of a protection strategy, as required in GSR Part 3 [1] and GSR Part 7 [2]
and suggested in this publication provides opportunity for States to collate, at one place, all
relevant information that relates to ensuring justified and optimized protection and safety
during an emergency for the benefit mostly of those whose advise and decisions in an
emergency response are the most needed, while bringing them up to date with the latest
standards and recommendations given in Refs [1, 2, 9, 10]. It will also help identifying
elements needed to be further elaborated at the national level, improving consistency and
increasing the transparency among all concerned parties. Finally, it will support engagement
and building trust with the public and other interested parties through open sharing of the
relevant information that underpins their protection and safety in a nuclear or radiological
emergency.
To apply the new concept of protection strategy as required in GSR Part 3 [1] and GSR Part 7
[2], States need to carefully review all necessary information so that informed decisions are
made on how the new concept of protection strategy that considers applying the dose concepts
of projected dose, received dose and residual dose impact current arrangements, on the best
way to implement these concepts and on how consistency is ensured across various
arrangements and documentation. Thus, the process of development of the protection strategy
entails taking account of information and data already available (e.g. from existing emergency
arrangements), compiling additional information or developing additional aspects that are of
relevance and applying it within the context of the protection strategy in a coherent manner.
Such a process calls for collaboration with all relevant response organizations with
responsibilities at all levels. Their engagement is essential and enables issues such as the
acceptability, feasibility and any practicalities associated with the protection strategy to be
identified, discussed and resolved in a timely manner.
The developed protection strategy then forms the basis for revision of the existing emergency
arrangements (e.g. emergency plans at national and local levels) and/or development of
additional arrangements (e.g. specific procedures) among all response organizations. It is with
the execution of these arrangements in an emergency response, that the protection strategy is
implemented in a nuclear or radiological emergency.
2.2.1. Documentation of the protection strategy at the preparedness stage
How the protection strategy is documented at the national level is strongly influenced by the
established national EPR framework. Based on experience, three options for documenting the
protection strategy can be identified as follows:

5

− Protection strategy as a standalone document issued at national level;
− Protection strategy as a section in, or part of, the national emergency response plan;
− Elements of a protection strategy included in various documents, such as policy
documents, regulations, guidance and emergency plans.
Any of these options has advantages and disadvantages from a practical point of view. The
first of the listed options has the advantage of having all relevant information underpinning a
justified and optimized protection and safety in an emergency response at one place while
promoting consistency and ensuring transparency. A national protection strategy document is
subject to approval at a high governmental level, giving the contents of the protection strategy
a high degree of enforceability. Such a document necessarily contains primarily high level
statements of the protection policies, goals and the means of achieving them. It does not
contain operational details but provides a firm basis for ensuring such details are included in a
coherent and consistent manner in the various emergency arrangements such as emergency
plans at different levels. Such an option allows for a more stable document that is not
dependent on frequent revisions. However, the level of details to be covered in such a national
document is again driven by the national EPR framework and as a result, they may differ
among States. Moreover, some State would need to embark on changing the legislation to
allow for developing a protection strategy as a new policy document before they can develop
the strategy as a standalone document.
The second of the listed options brings the advantage of preventing possible repetitions and
inconsistencies between the protection strategy and the national emergency response plan and,
hopefully, with other associated policies, plans and procedures. As with the first option, this
option also has the advantage of having all relevant information underpinning a justified and
optimized protection and safety in an emergency response at one place while promoting
consistency and ensuring transparency. However, the review cycle of the national emergency
response plan (driven primarily by the various operational arrangements being elaborated
therein) might lead to unnecessarily frequent revision of the protection strategy. Furthermore,
while in some States this approach might appear to be more easily implemented, the
administrative arrangements in other States might make this arrangement inappropriate, e.g.
in some federal States where elements of the protection strategy and the emergency plan
might be administered by bodies at different federal or national levels.
The third option, of distributing the components or elements of the protection strategy among
various documents, as a current practice in most States, poses a major challenge to even those
whose advice or decision is essential in an emergency response in relation to finding and
using all the relevant information to be considered in an emergency response. Keeping all
these components or elements consistent and up to date would be particularly difficult under
these circumstances considering the number of various documents impacted by a change
occurring at one, for example, policy document. Bringing all documents up to date and
consistent in such case takes a lot of time and practically may not be possible to have all of
them consistent and up to date all at the same time. Finally, it is difficult to ensure
transparency and effective and meaningful cooperation on the entire basis underpinning the
protection and safety in a nuclear or radiological emergency (which extends beyond just
radiation protection considerations) as different documents are developed with different
groups of concerned parties and used for consulting with different groups of interested parties.
Thus, such an option is not further considered in this publication and is not advised.
The practical guidance provided in this publication focuses on a single national protection
strategy, irrespective whether the strategy would be issued as a separate document or as part
of the national emergency response plan. In case the latter option is pursued, the generic

6

contents of the protection strategy might be reconsidered to avoid overlaps with the contents
of the national emergency response plan.
In the context of the first and the second option of documentation of the protection strategy,
development of a single national strategy helps to achieve a higher level of oversight and
coordination than the development of multiple protection strategies. Having multiple
protection strategies imposes additional operational level details to be elaborated, which are
generally already captured either partially or fully in existing emergency plans, procedures
and other arrangements and continue to be part of such operational arrangements.
Nevertheless, States might decide to develop multiple protection strategies, for example for
different types of a nuclear or radiological emergency or for particular sites, if this is
determined to be helpful. Still, the practical guidance provided in this publication is equally
relevant in cases governments decide for multiple strategies.
2.2.2. Implementation of the protection strategy in response
The national protection strategy (as a document) is not intended to change during the response
to an emergency. It is expected to be maintained as a framework for implementing emergency
response as the emergency evolves. The national protection strategy has to allow for different
options to be implemented in the response to a range of emergencies, and only those options
that are best suited for the actual circumstances need to be implemented through execution of
the pre-established emergency arrangements.
The protection strategy implemented in the response (referred to as the adapted protection
strategy) needs to be continually reassessed as the emergency evolves and modified, as
appropriate, to address the prevailing conditions. A flexibility to allow doing so would need to
be embedded in the national protection strategy when developed at the preparedness stage so
that the emergency arrangements be designed accordingly. Figure 1 illustrates the differences
between the national protection strategy, developed at the preparedness stage, and the adapted
protection strategy that is implemented in the emergency response.
While the national protection strategy itself is not modified during an emergency response, it
may be reviewed considering operational experience and lessons learned following an
emergency, as well as from exercises and events occurring within the country or other
countries abroad. The results of such reviews are then used to decide on any revision needed
to the protection strategy itself or to relevant emergency arrangements through which it is
implemented.
Phase

Protection strategy
National protection strategy

Preparedness

 Describes what needs to be achieved in an emergency response, the basis upon which
decisions are made, justified and optimized protective actions, means of assessing
effectiveness and means for consultation on the adapted protection strategy

 Expected to be a formal document at the national level with high level approval
 Not modified in the course of the emergency response
 Improved (if needed) based on lessons learned

Response

Adapted protection strategy

 Adapted based on available information and prevailing conditions at the time of emergency
 Includes set of actions, processes and operational arrangements
 Not expected to be a formal document

FIG. 1. The differences between the protection strategy at the preparedness stage
and during response.
7

2.3. Place of the protection strategy among other relevant documents
The protection strategy supports and is supported by the necessary legislation, regulations,
emergency plans, procedures and other emergency arrangements, which may be updated more
frequently. While the relevant legislation, regulations and other legally binding instruments,
including international standards and best practice, provide a basis for the development of the
protection strategy itself and various elements contained therein, the emergency arrangements
will significantly more details on the operational arrangements and the mechanisms for
coordination through which the protection strategy is implemented. A schematic diagram of
the relationship between the protection strategy, should it be part of the national emergency
response plan or a separate document, and relevant standards, legislation, regulations,
emergency plans, procedures and other emergency arrangements is provided in Fig. 2.

(a)

(b)

FIG. 2. A schematic diagram showing the place of the protection strategy with other
supporting documentation and emergency arrangements should the protection strategy be a
separate document (a) or part of the national emergency response plan (b).

8

2.4. Elements of the protection strategy
In line with Requirement 5 of GSR Part 7 [2] and Requirement 44 of GSR Part 3 0, the
protection strategy needs to elaborate on the dosimetric criteria that provide a basis, on
radiation protection grounds primarily, for justified and optimized protective actions and other
response actions. However, the protection strategy is not limited to this element only. While
the expectations for what the exact elements of the protection strategy are may vary from
State to State, from organization to organization, and even from expert to expert, an effort was
made in this publication to derive a reasonable content of the protection strategy comprising
decision making criteria as well as other elements. These elements of the protection strategy
are expected to clearly specify the following:
- What does the protection strategy aim to achieve?
o This aspect includes, for example, discussion of the goals that the protection
strategy and the response aim to achieve; it serves the purpose of having common
view among all concerned parties of the end objective they all contribute to.
- What does it apply to?
o This aspect includes, for example, discussion on the scope of the protection
strategy and it aims to bring clarity to all concerned parties regarding the range of
emergency scenarios it applies to.
- The basis upon which decisions are made;
o This includes the decision making criteria and tools (to be) applied as well as
means to assess the situation against the selected criteria. For example, generic
and operational criteria for taking and lifting protective actions, use of any
prediction models to facilitate optimal use of available resources without
jeopardizing the effective implementation of the protection strategy, and use of
radiation monitoring results.
- The justified and optimized protective actions considered and means for their
adjustment including lifting;
o This includes a description of the suite of protective actions and other response
actions that are to be taken to achieve the goals set up in the protection strategy
and how they are adapted and lifted as the emergency evolves.
- Any relevant considerations to address the prevailing conditions at the time of the
emergency that may impact the selection of specific options;
o This includes discussion on the aspects to be considered at the time of the
emergency with the aim to ensure safe implementation of the pre-planned actions
in the protection strategy. For example, severe weather conditions may render the
planned evacuation unsafe and call for a different set of actions to be invoked.
- Means of assessing the effectiveness of the protection strategy and for its adjustment as
the emergency evolves;
o This includes discussion on the means for dose assessment and assessment of
compliance, use of reference level and how this is done.
- Means for consultation on the adapted protection strategy in the course of the
emergency response;

9

o This includes discussion on how the interested parties are consulted, on what
aspects of the adaptation, time available to do so and how their voice is factored
into the decision making during the emergency response.
The protection strategy needs to address the necessary relation to the strategy to regain control
on the site and on how emergency workers and helpers in an emergency are always protected.
Moreover, the protection strategy itself may impose specific considerations and even
priorities for the development of other strategies, for example related to radiation monitoring
and assessment, waste management, public communication as well as considerations for
nuclear security system and measures. For example, if the decision has been made for
implementing evacuation in the urgent protective action planning zone (UPZ) around a
nuclear power plant (NPP) based on radiation monitoring results, then the monitoring strategy
needs to address radiation monitoring of the respective area within the UPZ as a priority to
allow for effective implementation of the protection strategy as such. This also impacts the
necessary information and instruction to be provided to the public living in the area and, thus,
sets priority for public communication strategy as well.
Moreover, effective implementation of the protection strategy calls for an adequate record
keeping system (for example, records of the location of the affected members of the
population, before and after implementation of protective actions, dates of movement from
one location to another, time of iodine thyroid blocking (ITB) administration, activities while
sheltering, dose records, measures taken in each area, radiation monitoring results, economic
data). Transboundary coordination and feedback from consultation with interested parties are
also relevant. Although such aspects might not be included in detail in the protection strategy,
they impact both the emergency management system and the quality management
programmes that need to be such to allow availability of necessary data and information to
those in need. These aspects may need to be addressed in the protection strategy so as to
provide a basis for development of other strategies and other aspects of the emergency
response in a transparent and consistent manner so as to allow for effective implementation of
the protection strategy.
The protection strategy may contain an executive summary written in a simple and
understandable language that targets non-technical community and the public in general. Its
aim would be to bring the protection strategy closely to these groups by explaining plainly
what the strategy is and how it provides for radiation protection, safety and the well-being of
affected populations in a nuclear or radiological emergency.
Finally, the level of details to be provided in the protection strategy is also driven by the
national context. In any case, the protection strategy may not provide all necessary details but
need to include sufficient information to support effective decision making and to enable
development of appropriate emergency plans, procedures and other emergency arrangements.
A template for the protection strategy, which provides an overview of its expected contents in
more details, is provided in Appendix II. In case the protection strategy is developed as part of
the national emergency response plan, its proposed contents might need to be closely assessed
against the contents of the national emergency response plan to avoid overlaps and
duplication. States may use the template as proposed in this publication or may follow another
format, provided it contains all relevant information as given in the template in Appendix II.
An example protection strategy developed on the basis of IAEA safety standards and
technical guidance is provided in Annex I.

10

3. BASIS FOR THE DEVELOPMENT OF A PROTECTION STRATEGY
This section provides details of the drivers for developing the protection strategy (i.e. the
goals of emergency response or objectives to be met in the response), the components of the
planning basis and its application in the hazard assessment for the purpose of emergency
preparedness and response. Practical guidance on hazard assessment and application of its
results in the development of a protection strategy is also provided.
3.1. Goals of emergency response
Nuclear or radiological emergency can have a wide range of consequences and an effective
emergency response has to address them as a whole. Although the initial priority is focused
on those efforts that aim to protect the public against the harmful health effects due to
exposure to radiation, other consequences also need to be addressed in a timely manner.
Namely, nuclear or radiological emergency can have adverse non-radiological consequences
(economic, social and psychological) that can overcome the radiological consequences and
warrant adequate response to ensure that they are minimized. To help designing a robust EPR
framework that addresses the various consequences of the emergency as well as of the
emergency response, para. 3.2 of GSR Part 7 [2] defines the goals of emergency response as
follows:
“(a)

To regain control of the situation and to mitigate consequences;

(b)

To save lives;

(c)

To avoid or to minimize severe deterministic effects;

(d)

To render first aid, to provide critical medical treatment and to manage the
treatment of radiation injuries;

(e)

To reduce the risk of stochastic effects;

(f)

To keep the public informed and to maintain public trust;

(g)

To mitigate, to the extent practicable, non-radiological consequences;

(h)

To protect, to the extent practicable, property and the environment;

(i)

To prepare, to the extent practicable, for the resumption of normal social and
economic activity.”

These goals represent an international consensus of what needs to be achieved in the response
to a nuclear or radiological emergency for the response to be effective. While the first goal
relates to efforts to be done on the source itself to mitigate the consequences (through
preventing further escalation or delaying it to allow for effective protection of the public), the
rest of the goals relate to efforts to be made to deal with the range of radiological and nonradiological consequences until the situation allows preparations to be made to resume normal
social and economic activity. These goals are expected to be the driving force for the
development of the protection strategy and the establishment of various emergency
arrangements including emergency plans and procedures. Therefore, the set of goals to be
achieved in an emergency response needs to be agreed at the national level and stated at the
beginning of the protection strategy. Each of the agreed goals will need to be considered in
the protection strategy in terms of the timeframe in which it can be achieved, and the actions
needed to achieve that goal. This helps all concerned parties to have a common understanding
on objectives they aim to achieve when undertaking the agreed response functions they are
responsible for.

11

Examples of how each of these goals may be achieved and of the bodies responsible are
provided in Table 1.
3.2. Planning basis
The planning basis brings together the relevant data and information at national, regional and
local levels and, where appropriate, at the international level, needed as an input to the
assessment of hazards for EPR purposes and to the development of the protection strategy and
of associated emergency arrangements.
Much of the data and information referred to in the planning basis is likely to have been
gathered in preparing the existing emergency arrangements in a State. Depending on the type
and level of data and information gathered earlier, that data and information may be used
directly or may need to be updated, as appropriate, for the purposes of developing the
protection strategy. Where such information is not available, States will need to compile all
the necessary data and information before they can embark on developing the protection
strategy and associated emergency arrangements. The level of detail of the information
gathered need to be sufficient to provide the basis for an appropriately detailed hazard
assessment and for an effective protection strategy. The level of detail for various aspects
(such as potentially affected areas and population groups, available infrastructure or
meteorological data) need to be sufficient to support the needs of a national, largely generic,
assessment for particular types of source or facility. This information may be generalized
from more localized, site-specific information or derived by other means. In any case, more
extensive and detailed planning basis information is needed for a site-specific hazard
assessment and for the development, justification and optimization of a site-specific
protection strategy.
The planning basis includes data and information obtained from various organizations at
national, regional and local levels as well as from the regulatory body and operating
organizations. It may also necessitate cooperation with representatives or organizations in
neighbouring States to provide mutual support in gathering relevant data and information
where there is a potential for transboundary emergencies. It is therefore important that various
organizations with relevant responsibilities (e.g. operating organizations, the regulatory body
and relevant off-site response organizations) as well as other institutions that are holder of
relevant information and data (e.g. research institutes, statistics agencies) are consulted on the
data and information they hold and can provide, conditions under which they can provide the
data and information, conditions under which the data and information can be used thereafter
and on any associated practicalities involved in compiling the planning basis. The importance
of gathering this data and information for the purpose of developing an effective protection
strategy needs to be well explained to all and the way it is intended to be used and shared (or
made known to others) needs to be well established.

12

13

Means of achieving the goal
Taking measures and actions to prevent, delay and/or reduce the release of radioactive material and exposure of
individuals which is primary responsibility of the operating organizations. In the case of dangerous source being
found (EPC IV) with no operating organization to be account responsible for, this goal remains under the
responsibility of the first responders who need to secure the source and prevent further exposures of individuals
from being in contact with the source.
Taking actions to save the life of individuals involved in the emergency and provision of prompt medical care to
those in need by either operating organization or response organizations.
Taking urgent protective actions and other response actions to keep the dose below the threshold for severe
deterministic effects. In many cases, these protective actions are most effective when taken before, or shortly
after, a significant release of radioactive material from a facility or before, or shortly after, an exposure. This
goal is primarily the responsibility of operators and the off-site response organizations.
Ensuring that the first to arrive at the site are qualified to immediately provide first aid. Later, very specialized
treatment of radiation-induced injuries may be provided by medical specialists. Its effectiveness is dependent
on: recognition of the need for specialized treatment, the training of medical personnel in radiological response
and basic radiation protection principles, and on timely identification of when international assistance might be
needed in providing the necessary specialized treatment and in dose assessment. This goal is the responsibility
of operator and off-site organizations (primarily first responders and health services).
Taking protective actions and other response actions effectively to reduce the risk for stochastic effects below the
levels at which incidence of radiation induced cancers among population is discernible as a priority and
thereafter, keeping the doses as low as reasonably achievable, provided justified and optimized actions are
available. This and subsequent goals have shared responsibility among operators and off-site response
organizations.

Goal of emergency response

To regain control of the situation and to
mitigate consequences

To save lives

To avoid or to minimize severe
deterministic effects

To render first aid, to provide critical
medical treatment and to manage the
treatment of radiation injuries

To reduce the risk of stochastic effects

TABLE 1. MEANS FOR ACHIEVING GOALS OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE

14
Means of achieving the goal
Providing the public with timely, useful, truthful, consistent and coordinated information about the emergency
and emergency response actions while using simple and easily understandable language. It is important that the
communication is maintained in both directions, so that authorities can maintain an understanding of public
concerns and provide further information as needed. It is also important to ensure that sensitive nuclear security
information is appropriately protected from unauthorized disclosure.
Implementing proper public communication strategy, provision of social support and considering these
consequences in overall justification and optimization processes for the protection strategy. Addressing
conflicting and non-informative materials from official sources and the technical community is important for
achieving this goal.
Taking measures to limit the spread of contamination and ensuring that any remedial actions taken to reduce the
environmental impact (e.g. decontamination) do more good than harm.
Taking various actions and activities that provide for appropriate radiation protection to the public as well as for
normal living conditions (including promoting resumption of social and economic activity and rebuilding
necessary infrastructure). These actions and activities relate to the prerequisites stipulated in Section 3 of GSG11 [8].

Goal of emergency response

To keep the public informed and to
maintain public trust

To mitigate, to the extent practicable,
non-radiological consequences

To protect, to the extent practicable,
property and the environment

To prepare, to the extent practicable, for
the resumption of normal social and
economic activity

The planning basis encompasses a wide range of data and information that can be grouped as
related to:
 The governmental, legal and regulatory framework in a State;
 The characteristics of the facilities, activities and sources that can give rise to an
emergency;
 The characteristics of the areas that can be potentially affected by the consequences of
an emergency and locations where emergency response actions might be warranted as
well as characteristics of the potentially affected populations;
 Resources and infrastructure available to support the implementation of the protection
strategy;
 Experience.
Examples of the type of data and information necessary to form the planning basis in each of
these five groups are considered in Sections 3.2.1 to 3.2.5.
The level of detail of the data and information gathered is normally enough to provide the
basis for the development of the national protection strategy. Depending on the needs, the
details of various aspects (such as potentially affected areas and population groups, available
infrastructure or meteorological data) may need to be expanded during the hazard assessment,
during the development, justification and optimization of the protection strategy or during the
development of associated emergency arrangements.
3.2.1. The governmental, legal and regulatory framework
Before the development of the protection strategy can be initiated, the existing governmental,
legal and regulatory framework within a State needs to be well understood. This covers at
least the areas of emergency preparedness and response, crisis management and civil
protection, radiation protection, nuclear and radiation safety, nuclear security and public
security in general, public health and safety of members of the public and workers, and
environmental protection. Some of these areas may also be governed by international legal
instruments (e.g. Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident and Convention on
Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency [11], Convention on
Nuclear Safety [12], International Health Regulations [13], ILO Radiation Protection
Convention [14]), to which the State has become a party. In addition, there may also be
bilateral or multilateral arrangements and agreements in place, for example related to
emergency preparedness and response where there is an NPP located in a neighbouring State.
Such agreements may also impose certain aspects to be adhered to when developing the
protection strategy or associated emergency arrangements with the aim of better
harmonization at regional level.
The existing governmental, legal and regulatory framework imposes ways in which the
protection strategy and associated emergency arrangements are formulated and could already
have resulted in specific arrangements put in place. It is therefore essential to better
understand, as part of the planning basis, the circumstances within which the protection
strategy can be formulated and any associated limitations and practicalities related to current
practice in the State. Without sharing common understanding on this, the development of the
protection strategy is a difficult and very challenging process. Compiling of this information
also allows to identify responsibilities for developing the protection strategy and for
consultation with interested parties and to recognize those concerned parties that are to be

15

involved in the overall process. It also helps utilizing the all-hazard approach for the sake of
optimal use of available resources and structures.
Furthermore, international safety standards and technical guidance need to be used when
compiling the planning basis to provide foundation for developing a harmonized protection
strategy in line with most current international requirements and recommendations. While the
governmental, legal and regulatory framework might have been in place for many years, this
exercise is an opportunity to reconsider its update to better align it with the latest international
requirements and recommendations (such as those contained in GSR Part 7 [2] and ICRP 103
[10]). Should this revision be estimated to be a lengthy process, interim solutions have to be
drawn (e.g. a decision issued by the government) and agreed to allow development of the
protection strategy without delays while new laws or regulations are adopted.
3.2.2. Characteristics of facilities, activities and sources
With the aim to enable characterization of facilities, activities and sources for which it is
possible that situations may arise warranting an emergency response on the State’s territory
(and thus, protection strategy to be prepared for) and assessment of associated hazards, it is
necessary to prepare an inventory of the type, location and other characteristics of the various
facilities, activities and sources in the State and, where appropriate, beyond borders. This is
expected to include compiling and analysing the information regarding relevant transport
activities and common routes when transporting nuclear or radioactive material, as well as
information regarding non-radiation related hazards (e.g. physical, chemical, biological)
associated with the facility, activity and sources that may have an impact on the way the
protection strategy can be formulated and associated emergency arrangements developed. It is
assumed that these facilities, activities and sources are already under stringent regulatory
control in the State. An inventory of them and associated data and information is expected to
be in place at the national level and usually it is maintained by the regulatory body of a State.1
It is also likely that, for them, some form of risk or safety analysis have already been
performed for various purposes (as required in IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 4
(Rev. 1), Safety Assessment for Facilities and Activities [15]) as well as hazard assessment
for the purpose of establishing adequate on-site emergency arrangements (as required in GSR
Part 7 [2]) primarily. Such a documentation provides a useful starting point for the
characterization of facilities and activities and for the hazard assessment which provides the
basis for developing the national protection strategy. It is assumed that such documentation
owned by the operating organization is already available for the regulatory body as well2 and
is included in the planning basis.
In addition, results of a threat assessment performed3 for nuclear security purposes, as
recommended in Ref [16], will contain useful insights on the credibility of certain criminal or
intentional unauthorized acts involving or directed at these facilities, activities and sources
which have relevance for emergency preparedness and response in general, as well as for the
hazard assessment in particular. For this reason, the result of the threat assessment is normally
part of the planning basis. However, such threat assessment results may have more stringent
rules on what information can be shared, in what form and to whom can be made known. This
1

If this is not the case, this may call for arranging such information be collected directly from users and for
establishing a database.
2
Usually, it is required that such documentation forms part of the licensing documentation.
3
Threat assessment is a process of evaluating the nuclear security threats, based on available intelligence, law
enforcement and open source information that describes the motivations, intentions and capabilities of these
threats, where threat refers to a person or group of persons with motivation, intention and capability to commit a
malicious act.

16

highlights the necessity for close cooperation with nuclear security specialists who are
responsible for the provision of the necessary nuclear security information and, where
relevant, the competent authorities for nuclear security, so that relevant information in
appropriate form is included in the planning basis and considered in the hazard assessment,
development of the protection strategy and associated emergency arrangements.
Technical resources that aid the development of the protection strategy and provide inputs to
the hazard assessment also include statistics (or other relevant information) from
manufacturers and vendors on equipment and sources used at specific facilities or in specific
activities, as appropriate.
3.2.3. Characteristics of the potentially affected areas, locations and populations
Characterization of the potentially affected areas, locations and populations is a necessary part
of the planning basis. The exact radiological and non-radiological impacts of the emergency
will differ depending on the characteristics of the surrounding area, for example whether it is
agricultural or industrial land, and on the form of agriculture and industry present.
Furthermore, the type and density of housing and the habits and behaviour of the population
influence exposure scenarios and pathways and the level of dose to be received, the protective
actions that might be appropriate and their effectiveness. For example, factors such as the
typical housing, and the shielding factors associated with it, determine the doses received
indoors and the effectiveness of sheltering as a protective action. The characterization of the
population and areas helps to align the protection strategy and associated plans to the location
and emergency scenarios, particularly in site-specific planning. This information may also be
included in the generic national information, which provides a basis for a national protection
strategy.
The locations and characteristics of special facilities such as hospitals, chemical plants,
prisons, water supply systems in the potentially affected areas also need to be identified. Such
facilities cannot be simply closed or abandoned if the surrounding area is evacuated and
suitable alternative actions have to be considered in the protection strategy. Facilities such as
chemical plants and water supply systems either need to be shut down in a safe condition,
which may take some time to achieve, or continue to operate under modified conditions,
depending on the situation. All such factors need to be considered in the protection strategy as
well as in the associated arrangements. Relevant information therefore needs to be collated as
part of the planning basis.
Other forms of data from previous assessments may also be useful inputs particularly to the
hazard assessment, such as historical meteorological data from the facility and its vicinity,
which support the selection of appropriate meteorological data for assessing potential
consequences and, thus, for developing an adequate protection strategy.
The level of detail on which this information and data is collected varies depending on its use;
it needs to be commensurate with the purpose of developing the national protection strategy.
This is less detailed than would be necessary for establishing comprehensive operational
arrangements. However, as indicated above, this more detailed information may be used to
develop the generic information needed for a national protection strategy, for example for
particular types of facility.
3.2.4. Infrastructure and resources
In preparing the protection strategy and associated emergency plans, it is clearly important to
identify the infrastructure and the human, technical, and financial resources available to
support the implementation of the protection strategy. The relevant information is wide17

ranging and needs to be collated from a variety of sources. It is therefore necessary to involve
many organizations and interested parties in the specification, collection and application of
this category of planning basis information.
The state of the existing transport infrastructure (e.g. road and rail networks) is a key
consideration given that it is influences the speed with which response organizations can
reach the site of the emergency to help mitigating its consequences on-site or to support
protective actions for members of the public. Such considerations also affect the amount of
time necessary to undertake protective actions such as evacuation. Information on the
transport system is therefore an essential part of the planning basis.
Other features of infrastructure that need to be considered in planning and response are those
necessary to support protective actions for special facilities such as hospitals, chemical plants,
prisons, water supply systems in the potentially affected areas. For example, if it becomes
necessary to evacuate patients and staff from a hospital, it is necessary to ensure that patients
are moved to an appropriate facility and that they receive continuing care during and after
transfer. Appropriate supervision of and accommodation for prisoners are also prerequisites of
any evacuation of prison populations.
The development of the protection strategy and associated emergency plans requires a
detailed understanding of the human resources necessary and available in an emergency,
including the number of responders, their qualifications and training (and associated training
needs). The technical resources may involve many types of equipment with a range of general
and specific purposes, from fire engines to radiation monitoring equipment. The financial
resources available under different circumstances and the mechanisms for making them
available also need to be identified.
Paragraph 4.8 of GSR Part 7 [2] states: “The government shall ensure that response
organizations, operating organizations and the regulatory body have the necessary human,
financial and other resources, in view of their expected roles and responsibilities and the
assessed hazards, to prepare for and to deal with both radiological and non-radiological
consequences of a nuclear or radiological emergency, whether the emergency occurs within
or beyond national borders.”
The adequacy of the resources available to response organizations, operating organizations,
the regulatory body and others to fulfill their allocated responsibilities needs to be determined
at the preparedness stage, in order to plan for appropriate and efficient deployment during an
emergency. This in turn has an impact on how the protection strategy may look like.
Collection of relevant information is therefore an important element of the planning basis.
3.2.5. Experience
Records from operating experience and from past emergencies (both nuclear and radiological
emergencies, and conventional emergencies) may provide very useful input to the
development of a feasible protection strategy. Therefore, such information needs to be
compiled as part of the planning basis. This includes results from the analysis of mishaps,
near misses and similar events as well as past emergencies, associated lessons learned and any
corrective actions taken. In case that information involves aspects of sensitive information,
these aspects should be managed adequately to prevent inappropriate disclosure. This also
helps providing a better view on how the protection strategy may be developed under the
umbrella of the all-hazards approach.

18

3.3. Hazard assessment
Requirement 4 of GSR Part 7 [2] states: “The government shall ensure that a hazard
assessment is performed to provide a basis for a graded approach in preparedness and
response for a nuclear radiological emergency.”
In this context, the term ‘hazard assessment’ means an “assessment of hazards associated
with facilities, activities or sources within or beyond the borders of a State in order to
identify:
(a) Those events and the associated areas for which protective actions and other response
actions may be required within the State;
(b) Actions that would be effective in mitigating the consequences of such events.” [3]
Hazard assessment provides the basis for making adequate arrangements for the emergency
preparedness and response that are “commensurate with the hazards identified and the
potential consequences of an emergency” (para 4.18 of GSR Part 7 [2]). The results of the
assessment, together with other elements of the planning basis, enable the development of the
protection strategy, its justification and optimization.
States may pursue different approaches and methodologies to perform the hazard assessment
for emergency preparedness and response, including various models and tools for
consequence and dose assessments. These approaches and models may necessitate different
information and data which may influence the results and their interpretation and may impose
different range of uncertainties. For example, methods or models may be designed to be
simple and conservative or more detailed and realistic. The approach chosen has implications
for the amount of information that needs to be collected and on the way in which the results
are interpreted. It is therefore important that the approach adopted is agreed among all of the
parties involved before the hazard assessment is performed, and that all involved understand
the implications of the choice and associated uncertainties for the development of the strategy
and its associated emergency arrangements. How these uncertainties would then be
considered in the protection strategy and associated emergency arrangements, and the
flexibility they allow in an actual emergency response, need also to be discussed and agreed
among all parties involved.
Irrespective of the approach and methodology used, the hazard assessment involves the
application of the data and information gathered as part of the planning basis, particularly
related to the identification of emergency situations that might arise for the identified
facilities, activities and sources in order to assess the potential consequences that could arise,
and to identify the range of protective and other actions that might be warranted. In addition,
the safety or risk assessment performed for any another purpose (e.g. as required in GSR Part
4 (Rev. 1) [15]), may provide a useful starting point for performing the hazard assessment.
3.3.1. Hazard assessment process
The hazard assessment process needs to comprise of the following six main stages:
1. Characterization of postulated emergency situations;
2. Evaluation of the inventory or releases (including the radionuclide mix and the nature of
any chemical or other hazards);
3. Assessment of the distribution of radioactive and any other materials released (including
dispersion and deposition processes), when appropriate;
4. Assessment of the radiological consequences associated with the release or exposures;
19

5. Assessment of the non-radiological consequences;
6. Assessment of the effectiveness of possible protective actions.
Each stage of the hazard assessment process is described in Sections 3.3.1.1 to 3.3.1.6.
Performing the hazard assessment involves a range of expertise in its different stages beyond
just the EPR community, for example radiation protection experts, nuclear and radiation
safety specialists, researchers in various areas of safety and radiation protection and in the
performance of specific facilities or activities, and nuclear security specialists. They all may
provide essential inputs that would support and contribute to the hazard assessment although
they not necessarily have the expertise and knowledge in emergency preparedness and
response in general and in the development of the protection strategy. What the necessary
expertise is, who can provide it and what the associated inputs are, needs to be identified
when compiling the planning basis and before the hazard assessment is started, taking account
of the six stages and the work expected to be accomplished in each stage.
3.3.1.1. Characterization of postulated emergency situations
The first stage in the hazard assessment is to identify and characterize an appropriate range of
postulated emergencies for each type of facility, activity and source that may warrant prompt
action to mitigate the consequences in the State. This includes determination of credible
events (including those that may result in the failure of some or all safety systems as a result
of a safety-related unintentional event or a malicious act), their dynamics and evolution. The
type of events to be considered in the hazard assessment are listed in para 4.20 of GSR Part 7
[2] and include the following:
− Events of very low probability but with high consequences and events not considered in
the design (i.e. events that are beyond the design basis and conditions that are beyond
design extension conditions) which may also be criminal or intentional in nature;
− Events involving a combination of a nuclear or radiological emergency with a conventional
emergency (which may be the cause of the nuclear or radiological emergency but not
necessarily) such as a nuclear or radiological emergency following an earthquake, a
volcanic eruption, a tropical cyclone, severe weather, a tsunami, an aircraft crash or civil
disturbances that may affect wide areas and/or impair capabilities to provide support in the
emergency response;
− Events that could affect several facilities and activities concurrently and the interactions
among the facilities and activities affected (e.g. in terms of resources to be deployed for an
effective emergency response); and
− Events at facilities in other States or events involving activities in other States (i.e. past
events in facilities or affecting activities such as those present in the State which resulted in
an emergency warranting a prompt action).
Example events that would need to be considered for NPPs, research reactors and nuclear fuel
cycle facilities include the loss of reactor core cooling resulting in fuel damage, damage to
spent fuel pools, and criticality events. The range of postulated and observed fuel damage
scenarios considered for an NPP need to include different forms of core damage leading to
releases to the containment and beyond. Such postulated events may range from the failure of
fuel pins and the release of gaseous fission products to the containment (gap release phase) to
a situation in which molten core debris (including reactor fuel) melts through the reactor
vessel and onto concrete structures below (ex-vessel melt release), which results in the release
of less volatile nuclides due to interaction with concrete and vaporization of radionuclides

20

deposited on surfaces within the reactor system during an earlier phase (in-vessel melt release
phase) [17].
Large fires and explosions are examples of the type of events that need to be considered for a
range of facilities and activities including radiopharmaceutical and source manufacturing.
Events that could affect storage facilities, or that could lead to sources becoming uncontrolled
(due to being lost, stolen or abandoned) and unshielded are also typical of the type of events
that would need to be considered in the hazard assessment. The hazard assessment would
need to take account of events such as loss of a radioactive source and subsequent removal of
the source from its shielding, resulting in exposures among members of the public who may
not have been aware of the associated hazard. The malfunctioning of the shielding mechanism
around a radiotherapy source or failures in the treatment planning and delivering software
resulting in the overexposure of patients are another relevant example of events that could
lead to an emergency warranting prompt action for consideration in the hazard assessment.
A range of nuclear security events which may lead to failure of nuclear security measures and
of all safety systems at a facility, or events involving the malicious use of radioactive sources
causing wide dispersal of radioactive material in the public domain and/or exposures to
members of the public need to be considered in the hazard assessment. Events which are
unintentional, intentional or criminal, and which take place at strategic locations, such as ports
or crossing border points, also need to be considered. Results of the national threat assessment
performed for nuclear security purposes (completed in line with Refs [16, 18, 19]) will inform
decision for the types of event and strategic location4 to be considered in the hazard
assessment.
Finally, experience arising from operational events, incidents and emergencies, including near
misses, also need to be taken into account when identifying all relevant events that may lead
to an emergency warranting a prompt action.
3.3.1.2. Evaluation of inventory of release and the mix of radionuclides
This stage in the hazard assessment process involves an assessment of the inventory of the
release or source, including its chemical composition and total activity, and the projected
release (e.g. proportion of the inventory and the radionuclide composition) that could arise
under defined emergency conditions. This is specialized information that depends upon the
nature of the event and of the facility, activity or source. It is associated with the impact the
postulated (at the initial stage) emergency scenarios are expected to have. It may necessitate
research into fundamental chemical and physical processes and, thus, it involves interaction
with experts outside the EPR community. It involves the consideration of radionuclides
present or released from the source which, as appropriate, includes decay products (i.e. fission
products and activation products), and of chemical and other hazards. In making this
evaluation, the magnitude and mix of radionuclides released during past emergencies need to
be considered. This certainly contributes to the evaluation of a potential release under
postulated emergency conditions.
When evaluating the inventory of release and the radionuclide mix, consideration has to be
given to account not only those mixes or radionuclides which may have meaningful
contribution to the dose of the public, but also those with signification contribution to the
instrument response.

4

A location of high security interest in the State which is a potential target for terrorist attacks using nuclear
material or other radioactive material.

21

Many factors influence the amount and mix of radionuclides released in an emergency at an
NPP, notably the extent and type of damage to the reactor fuel [17]. The release of
radionuclides to the environment is affected by the conditions within the plant (e.g. sprays and
plate-out). It also depends on the extent to which the fuel is cooled. For example, the release
of radionuclides from spent fuel may be postulated in circumstances where the fuel is not
being cooled and, thus, heats up by its own decay heat, resulting in a self-sustained zirconium
oxidation reaction once the zirconium ignition temperature is reached [17]. This is further
discussed at the next stage of the hazard assessment.
Evaluation of the release in case of an emergency involving a radioactive source also depends
on the type of events considered in the hazard assessment. A publication within the EPR
Series, EPR-D-Values 2006 [20], considers various types of event and exposure scenario for
the sake of determining the hazards associated with radioactive sources, taking account of the
amount of the material present, its physical and chemical form, and the quantities of
radioactive material that may be dangerous5. The assumptions made in Ref. [20] (e.g. on
release fraction in case of dispersal of radioactive materials) can provide a good basis for
evaluation of the releases or exposures in case of an emergency involving a radioactive source
at the facility or activity level as well as at the national level.
In case of emergency situations in which there is a possibility for concurrent events to happen,
it is important to consider the impact the concurring events may have on the level of release
and the radionuclide mix.
3.3.1.3. Assessment of the distribution of radioactive and any other materials released
Once the radioactive material expected to be released under postulated emergency conditions
has been determined, it is necessary to consider the impact on the release during the
“transport” from the source (that is the emergency site) to the individual. In the analysis, the
“transport” may be divided into the following steps:
 Transport from the source to the environment (e.g. atmosphere, water, objects)
eventually through a facility/source specific structure (e.g. containment of an NPP or
housing of an irradiator); and
 Transport from the environment to an individual (e.g. atmospheric dispersion and
deposition, movement of water to the public).
In the first step of this analysis, direct and indirect transport from the source to the
environment need to be considered. Direct transport would encompass cases in which the
radionuclide mixes determined at the previous stage would not change significantly (e.g.
direct containment bypass in an NPP or breach of a sealed radioactive source) while indirect
transport would encompass cases in which the radionuclide mix is affected by a
facility/source specific structure before being released to the environment.
Determining the impact on the radionuclide mix resulting from an indirect release is heavily
dependent on the type of source, the type of facility/source specific structure, and the
conditions during the event. The following factors need to be considered:
 The behaviour of the source within the facility/source specific structure during the
emergency progression (e.g. in- or ex-vessel melt, core/concrete interactions);
 The retention of any released mixes in the containment/source specific structure (e.g.
plate out, revaporisation);
5

A dangerous quantity is that which, if uncontrolled, could result in the death of an exposed individual or a
permanent injury that decreases that person’s quality of life 0.

22

 Mitigatory actions implemented within the facility/source specific structure (e.g. water
sprays, passive autocatalytic recombiners, chemical reactors);
 Release pathways within the facility/source specific structure (e.g. release through
filters or water pools);
 Other facility/source specific effects (e.g. self-sustained zirconium oxidation reaction in
a spent fuel pool, criticality accidents in a uranium reprocessing facility or fires in any
facility).
For determining the exact impact on the radionuclide mix, detailed and extensive physical,
chemical and engineering research and analysis are necessary, lying far outside the scope of
this publication and the expertise of the EPR community. Refs [21‒27] provide detailed
examples of such an analysis.
This process involves considering the dispersion and deposition of radionuclides during the
process of release and once released into the environment. This process therefore involves
consideration of dispersion and deposition arising:
 At the facility (e.g. plate-out);
 On the release pathway from the facility (e.g. spent fuel pools);
 In the atmosphere, terrestrial environment or water body into which material is released;
 Environmental migration of materials from the ground or surfaces on which they are
deposited.
At a nuclear facility, for example, the processes of plate-out may influence the profile of
radionuclides that remain within the facility and that are released to the environment.
Furthermore, the pathway through which the radionuclides are released affects the nature and
chemical composition of the release. Many of these factors are dependent not only on the
postulated emergency (e.g. a release from a spent fuel pool), but also on the site. Therefore,
generic assumptions need to be made in developing the hazard assessment.
The nature of the environment into which radionuclides are released also influences the
further distribution of activity. Materials released to the atmosphere are dispersed in air in a
manner that depends on many factors including the speed of the wind and the topography of
the local area. The deposition of this activity on surfaces, including the ground, soils,
agricultural produce, surface water bodies and buildings, depends on the characteristics of the
radionuclides, the nature of the surfaces present and the pattern of any rainfall. Materials
released to water bodies (e.g. lake, river or marine systems) are dispersed in the water body,
and the extent and speed of dispersion depend upon the nature of the water body (e.g. water
turbulence) and the speed of the stream. The distribution of activity between the water and
suspended and deposited particles depends upon the nature of the water body and the
radionuclides involved.
Radionuclides deposited on surfaces are further distributed among the various environmental
media by a range of processes, including migration through the soil and washout by the action
of rainfall, leading to further deposition on underlying surfaces and transfer to water bodies.
These processes affect both the dose rates at and above the surface and the activity
incorporated in environmental components such as foods. The uptake of radionuclides
depends on the nature of the soil, the radionuclides and, for foods, the position in the food
chain. For example, activity in milk is the result of transfer from soil, vegetation and through
the animal behavior.

23

A radiological emergency may or may not include the dispersion of radionuclides in the
environment. Some sources (i.e. dangerous sources) represent a dangerous hazard in an
undispersed form as well, as indicated above. The relevant assumptions and approaches to
make an analysis in such situations, depending on the type of event and exposure scenarios,
can be found in Ref. [20]. The corresponding stage in the assessment process in such
situations is the establishment of whether the quantity exceeds the relevant D-value and the
establishment of the state and location of the source. However, in any case, where the source
has been removed from its housing and is dispersed, it is necessary to consider the
mechanisms by which the radioactive material may be distributed by natural or human
activities. The radiological emergency in Goiania, Brazil [28] is an example of such a
situation. Due to the large number of assumptions and uncertainties taken into account in this
type of analysis, the results cannot be considered as an exact value, but rather as a very rough
estimate, calling for a reasonably conservative approach to ensure an effective protection of
the public.
In performing the analysis, experience from past emergencies need to be considered, such as
the estimated releases and depositions from the Chernobyl or the Fukushima Daiichi accidents
[29‒32] as well as from past radiological emergencies [28, 33‒36].
3.3.1.4. Assessment of the radiological consequences associated with the release or exposures
This stage of the hazard assessment involves undertaking an assessment of the radiological
consequences of the range of postulated emergencies associated with the identified facilities,
activities and sources being considered. This may take various forms, depending upon the
amount of information available and the purpose of the assessment, and encompasses the
following steps:
− Determining the relevant exposure scenarios and associated exposure pathways;
− Identifying the characteristics of the representative person;
− Performing relevant dose calculations.
Exposure scenario relates to “a postulated set of conditions, circumstances, events and
behaviour of the public that characterizes the exposure situation.” [17]. It will help
determining who might be exposed in the emergency considered and how. Thus, identifying
relevant exposure scenarios will provide a basis for determining the characteristics of the
representative person and the relevant exposure pathways (i.e. the routes by which radiation
or radionuclides can reach an individual resulting in radiation exposure). Although developed
for a specific purpose, examples of relevant exposure scenarios (i.e. ground, food preanalysis, skin and food post-analysis scenarios) and associated exposure pathways associated
with a severe reactor emergency are described in Ref. [17]. Examples of exposure scenarios
for emergencies involving radioactive sources, taking into account sealed sources as well as
their dispersal in the environment (e.g. pocket, room, inhalation, ingestion, contamination and
immersion scenarios) due to various causes, including unintentional and malicious acts, are
provided in Ref. [20]. A rigorous assessment will involve characterization of the temporal and
spatial distribution of any material released and the exposure scenarios and pathways
associated with each postulated emergency. The projected doses to people on-site and off-site
(as appropriate) may then be assessed (in the absence of protective actions) using information
from the planning basis on the characterization of both the area and population.
An assessment of the exposure of the public involves identification of the pathways by which
people may be exposed. The main relevant exposure pathways need to be determined on the
basis of the exposure scenario and, as appropriate, consider:

24

− External exposure from:
o The source;
o Activity in the plume (often referred to as cloud shine);
o Deposition on surfaces (e.g. the ground, often referred to as ground shine); and
o Resuspension of deposited radioactive material (often referred to as air shine).
− Internal exposure due to:
o Inhalation of material from the radioactive plume;
o Inhalation of deposited material that has been resuspended in the air (e.g. from the
ground or clothing);
o Ingestion of food, milk and drinking water and foods contaminated with
radionuclides; and
o Inadvertent ingestion of dust or deposited materials (e.g. from dirt on the hands).
The relative importance of these pathways depends upon many factors, including the
radionuclides released, the characteristics of the area, the age and habits of the population
(considered within the exposure scenario).
Any dose calculations as part of the hazard assessment need to be performed for a
representative person. The concept of representative person is established by the International
Commission on Radiation Protection (ICRP) for the purpose of radiological protection of the
public in any situation of exposure [10, 37] and it represents “an individual receiving a dose
that is representative of the doses to the more highly exposed individuals in the population” 0.
For the purposes of the hazard assessment (and for emergency preparedness and response area
in general), the representative person is a hypothetical construct that ensures that it is
characteristic of the most highly exposed individual under the assumed circumstances. It
aggregates the dose models for the internal and external exposure of ICRP reference persons
of different age groups together with relevant exposure scenario providing the highest dose
estimate for any exposure pathway of postulated emergency [17]. In doing so, those members
of the public that are most vulnerable regarding radiation exposure, i.e. children and pregnant
women, need to be considered.
How the construct of the representative person is done for the purpose of calculating OILs
taking account of the specific exposure scenario can be found in Ref. [17]. However, in
determining the representative person at the facility or national level, consideration needs to
be given to the realistic habits of the representative person associated for example with food
consumption and consumption rate, breathing rate and other local and site-specific
characteristics. While some extreme habits may also need to be considered, they are not
expected to define the characteristics of the representative person. To account for these
realistic habits to be associated with the representative person, information and data collected
as part the planning basis need to be used. This dictates the needed level of details to be
gathered as part of the planning basis as discussed earlier in this section.
Determining the relevant exposure scenarios and associated exposure pathways and
constructing the representative person allows for necessary dose calculations to be performed
using appropriate age dependent physiological parameters and appropriate dose coefficients.
In addition, care needs to be given that appropriate dose quantities are used within the hazard
assessment to evaluate radiation induced health effects or the detriment associated with
occurrence of stochastic effects in an exposed population. Namely, relative biological
effectiveness (RBE) weighted absorbed dose in an organ or tissue, equivalent dose to an organ
25

or tissue and the effective dose need to be calculated, as appropriate, when projecting doses
that might be received under the considered emergency conditions if no protective actions are
taken (i.e. projected doses). These calculations are used to identify where protective actions
may need to be taken (individually or in combination) in order to prevent severe deterministic
effects to occur and to reduce the risk of stochastic effects. Following identifying the range of
possible effective public protective actions (to be further discussed below), the doses that are
expected to be received if these actions are taken (i.e. residual doses) need to be also
calculated. The residual doses in this case help identifying the optimal combination of
protective actions to be pursued in the protection strategy with account taken on the pre-set
reference level (discussed in Appendix I).
The prompt implementation of protective actions depends on the existence of operational
criteria, primarily OILs of interest in this context, that allow for decisions on necessary
protective actions be made without need for further assessment. Thus, further calculations will
need to be made to develop default OILs along with the dose calculations discussed in this
section although this could be done at later stage as well. The methodology for the derivation
of such levels is elaborated in Refs. [17, 38]. In order to ensure that all age groups of the
population are sufficiently protected, three age groups are usually considered in such
assessments comprising infants (aged 1 year), child (aged 10 years) and adults (over 17 years
of age). Projected doses can be calculated for each exposure pathway at appropriate locations,
taking account of the distribution of radionuclides in the environment and the habits and
physiological characteristics of each age group. In this way, the group receiving the highest
effective or equivalent dose from a given exposure scenario can be identified to provide the
basis for considering the projected doses and the consequent need for protective actions. The
various estimations may provide information on a range of consequences that are specific for
a facility, activity or sources, as well as and areas and locations affected. This in turn, may
necessitate several strategies and plans to be developed for each specific situation and
different emergency preparedness approach to be adopted for them for particular sites,
facilities or locations. Further details are provided in Ref. [17].
3.3.1.5. Identifying possible non-radiological consequences
The efficiency of the efforts taken to protect the public in a nuclear or radiological emergency
does not only depend on how the radiological consequences are addressed but also on how it
is dealt with the adverse non-radiological (i.e. psychological, societal and economic)
consequences of the emergency and the response thereof. Experience has shown that, in many
cases, these non-radiological consequences could overcome the radiological ones and cause
more harm. Thus, in the hazard assessment care needs to be given to identify the range of
non-radiological consequences that might be expected under the considered emergency
conditions, so as to provide a basis for identifying suitable response actions to accompany the
protective actions in ensuring such consequences be minimized.
In contrast to radiological consequences, assessing possible non-radiological consequences
cannot be exact science. However, lessons learned from past nuclear and radiological
emergencies and other conventional emergencies can help identifying non-radiological
consequences that range from the economic impact on businesses, industry, tourism to
adverse psychosocial consequences associated with fear, lack of trust in authorities and lack
of information resulting in unwarranted actions being taken by the public (such as
unwarranted voluntary abortions, taking inappropriate drugs, shunning of individuals and
products from an effected area) in the belief that they provide for theirs and their families
protection and safety [28‒36].

26

At this stage, it is equally important to consider possible impacts of the emergency on any
critical functions for the emergency response (for example available infrastructure or
equipment), and the consequences associated with losing them. This allows later for the
protection strategy and associated emergency arrangements to be aligned to deal with a
greater range of situations and thus be more resilient to a wide range of circumstances.
Relevant information and data gathered from the planning basis (e.g. characteristics of the
affected areas and populations, businesses and industries that might be affected, goods in
routine import/export and other trade) can help identifying possible non-radiological
consequences. This again highlights the need for careful consideration be given on the type
and the level of information and data to be collected as part of the planning basis.
3.3.1.6. Assessment of the effectiveness of possible protective actions
Assessment of the radiological and non-radiological consequences will help identifying what
protective actions and other response actions may be warranted in order to prevent severe
deterministic effects, to reduce the risk of stochastic effects, to mitigate non-radiological
consequences and to prepare for the resumption of normal social and economic activity as
well as where and for whom they may apply. In turn, identifying these actions will also help
determining conditions in which such actions may need to be implemented, indicating the
necessary protection to be provided to the emergency workers. In this context, para. 4.23 of
GSR Part 7 [2] states: “In the hazard assessment, facilities and activities, on-site areas, offsite areas and locations shall be identified for which a nuclear or radiological emergency
could — with account taken of the uncertainties in and limitations of the information
available — warrant any of the following:
(a) Precautionary urgent protective actions to avoid or to minimize severe deterministic
effects by keeping doses below levels approaching the generic criteria at which urgent
protective actions and other response actions are required to be undertaken under any
circumstances, with account taken of Appendix II [of GSR Part 7];
(b) Urgent protective actions and other response actions to avoid or to minimize severe
deterministic effects and to reduce the risk of stochastic effects, with account taken of
Appendix II;
(c) Early protective actions and other response actions, with account taken of Appendix
II;
(d) Other emergency response actions such as longer term medical actions, with account
taken of Appendix II, and emergency response actions aimed at enabling the
termination of the emergency (see Requirement 18); or
(e) Protection of emergency workers in accordance with Requirement 11 and with
account taken of Appendix I [of GSR Part 7].”
Thus, at the last stage of the hazard assessment process, actions that are effective in mitigating
the consequences need to be identified. Options for actions to be implemented individually or
in combination are at varying degree of efficiency and the final selection of what options are
considered in the protection strategy needs to go through thorough justification and
optimization process as discussed in Section 5. This ensures that the actions envisaged do
more good than harm, are feasible and are optimized resulting in residual doses below the
reference level (discussed in Appendix I).
Examples of assessment of the effectiveness of various protective actions as a function of the
distance from the release point in case of severe reactor emergency can be found in Ref. [39].

27

An example of showing the effectiveness of various protective actions in keeping doses below
2 Gy weighted absorbed dose to the red bone marrow is presented in Fig. 3.

FIG. 3. Probability of exceeding 2.0 Gy weighted absorbed dose to the red marrow for
various protective actions assuming core melt and an early containment failure for a nuclear
power plant of about 3000 MW(th) [39].
Going through thorough justification and optimization when analysing the findings from such
an analysis will indicate the best options for protective actions to be included in the protection
strategy. These options are not necessarily those with lowest doses but those that provide the
best protection under the prevailing circumstances.
The consequences of the timing of the emergency progression and its implications on the time
available for decision making on specific protective actions and other response actions and
their implementation have to be assessed at this stage. This, in turn, also indicate the
necessary emergency arrangements to be put in place at the preparedness stage to allow for
effective protection of the public once an emergency occurs (e.g. pre-distribution of stable
iodine for efficient iodine thyroid blocking within specific areas).
The timeframes over which actions allow for effective protection of the public and for
resumption of normal social and economic activity are among the key factors in decision
making on the best choice of protection and safety. In addition, the following elements also
need to be considered when assessing the effectiveness of available protective actions:
− The need for protective actions and their efficiency will vary spatially and temporally;
− Dependency between actions (e.g. sheltering in case of a severe reactor emergency
involving the release of radioactive iodine will invoke the need for iodine thyroid
blocking simultaneously) and the need to accompany specific protective actions with
other response actions that provide for public reassurance (e.g. provision of medical
care and psychosocial counselling to evacuees when evacuation is considered);
− Other non-radiological hazards associated with the emergency or with the protective
actions, for example, presence of chemicals and other toxic hazards, possibilities for
fires or explosions, as they will have an impact on the exact protective actions to be
taken into account.

28

Appendix III provides an overview of the key protective actions and other response actions
highlighting their strengths, weaknesses and limitations as well as other aspects associated
with their implementation which impact the need for further considerations when developing
the protection strategy.
Regarding situations where there are concurrent events, it is important to consider not only the
impacts on the potential of concurrent events on the level of release, but also on the
effectiveness of protective actions, under such circumstances. In undertaking and using the
results of such assessments, it is necessary to consider the nature and extent of uncertainties
associated with them. The impact of these uncertainties needs to be considered when
analysing the options and deciding on the best options to be considered in the protection
strategy.
3.3.2. Identifying areas where emergency response actions may be warranted
The radiological consequences and doses to members of the public need to be assessed in the
hazard assessment as a function of distance to identify the appropriate extent of protective
actions. This helps to determine, through the hazard assessment, areas where emergency
response actions may be warranted as well as protective actions that may be effective in
dealing with the assessed consequences within these areas. This ensures effective
implementation of precautionary, urgent and early protective actions and other response
actions even when very limited information is available, and the uncertainties are large. Such
areas include the four emergency planning zones and distances and the inner cordoned-off
areas defined in GSR Part 7 [2]. The four emergency planning zones and distances are
applicable to facilities in EPCs I and II and are:
− A precautionary action zone (PAZ) for the area in which the focus is on taking
precautionary protective actions to avoid or minimize severe deterministic effects and
associated arrangements;
− An urgent protective action planning zone (UPZ) for the area in which the focus is on
taking urgent protective actions to reduce the risk of stochastic effects and associated
arrangements;
− An extended planning distance (EPD) for the area in which the focus is on taking early
protective actions to reduce the risk of stochastic effects and associated arrangements
which include those for conducting timely radiation monitoring and assessment;
− An ingestion and commodities planning distance (ICPD) for the area in which the focus
is on taking actions for ensuring food and commodities safety and associated
arrangements.
The level of planning and response for these areas is determined on the basis of the doses that
are expected to be incurred by the affected population in absence of any protective action, and
the urgency associated with implementation of effective public protective actions to ensure no
radiation induced health effects occur and the radiological consequences are mitigated. Their
implementation in the protection strategy has to ensure that a staggered emergency response
can be applied, focusing firstly on those in danger of sustaining deterministic effects and then
on those in danger of an increased risk for radiation induced cancers with planning that is
more specific and detailed (as reflected in emergency plans, procedures, exercises) in the
same line of priorities. More deliberate assessments and informed decisions are then foreseen
to lead to justified and optimized actions for the rest of affected population, if needed at all,
and arrangements that are more flexible are expected to accomplish this.

29

A similar approach is adopted for radiological emergencies with the establishment of an inner
cordoned off area which allows priority to be given to actions for those that may be exposed
to doses at which radiation induced health effects that could be attributed to radiation
exposure either as an individual outcome or as a collective outcome, could be observed.
Thus, for ensuring that effective protection strategy can be developed, it is important that the
hazard assessment studies the impact of the emergency as a function of distance, so that it
provides effective protection without delaying any efforts needed for those that are in most
risk. Methodology for performing such assessment and for deriving the radii for emergency
planning zones and distances for severe reactor emergencies is given in Ref. [39]. IAEA
safety standards [9, 40] and technical guidance [39] suggest generically derived and justified
and optimized radii for the emergency planning zones and distances and for the inner
cordoned off areas.
3.3.3. Application of EPCs
States need to perform a thorough hazard assessment and identification of areas where
emergency response actions may be warranted, as discussed above for the purpose of
developing the protection strategy as well as for establishing overall emergency arrangements.
The results of the hazard assessment assist States in applying a graded approach to both
emergency planning and response. However, this may be a lengthy process, necessitating a
range for expertise and knowledge. Therefore, it might be too challenging for those States that
lack such expertise and knowledge as well as face time limitations for establishing an
effective EPR framework. In such circumstances, the EPCs and generically derived and
justified suggested radii for emergency planning zones and distances and for inner cordonedoff areas in the IAEA safety standards [2, 9, 40] and technical guidance [39] can be used
instead. This can be done only after they have been considered within the national, local and
site-specific context.
Namely, the five EPCs defined in Requirement 4 of GSR Part 7 [2] establish the basis for a
graded approach to the application of the requirements and for developing generically
justified and optimized arrangements for preparedness and response for a nuclear or
radiological emergency. Thus, using the data and information compiled as part of the planning
basis (see Section 3.2.2) and the criteria provided in Table 4 of GS-G-2.1 [40], States can
determine the EPC applicable to the specific facilities, activities and sources of interest and
apply appropriate planning to them. For those facilities of EPCs I and II, a protection strategy
that considers the emergency planning zones and distances as required in GSR Part 7 [2] has
to be established to manage the off-site consequences. In selecting the sizes of the zones, the
suggested generic radii in GS-G-2.1 [40] and Ref [39] can also be used; however, it is
necessary that thorough processes of justification and optimization taking account of various
non-radiological factors (discussed in Section 5) are performed within the national context
when determining the exact radii of the areas and their boundaries and determining the best
strategy for protection and safety within these areas. The end result in terms of the protection
strategy is expected to be the same as after going through all stages of the hazard assessment
process.

30

4. DEVELOPMENT OF A PROTECTION STRATEGY
Once the planning basis has been compiled and the hazards associated with potential
consequences for a range of postulated nuclear or radiological emergencies assessed, the
protection strategy development can be initiated. The process to develop a protection strategy
needs to be defined and agreed among all concerned parties before the development is
initiated. It may include a timeline with actions to be completed, assignment of
responsibilities and associated milestones. Resources to be invested in the development also
need to be allocated.
4.1

Step-by-step approach for development of a protection strategy

A step-by-step approach for development of a protection strategy is proposed in this
publication to assist States in establishing protection strategy at the preparedness stage. An
overview of the steps is shown in Fig. 4.

FIG. 4. An overview of the steps involved in developing a protection strategy.

The approach was developed under the assumption that no emergency arrangements as
required in the IAEA safety standards exist in a State at the time with the intention that it may
be useful for those State which are currently embarking on developing effective EPR
framework. In addition, this approach may serve as a reminder to any State, including those
with a mature EPR framework, on all necessary aspects they need to consider when
developing or updating their protection strategy in line with the latest international
requirements.
It is recognized that some of these steps may already have been fully or partially completed,
as part of the development of the existing emergency arrangements at national level. For
example, selection of the reference level and other criteria, and features of the planning basis
and hazard assessment, may already have been established and continue to be relevant or
relevant emergency plans and procedures may already have been put in place. In these cases,
the associated steps may be modified to constitute a review for consistency with the aim to
31

identify need for revision to bring selected levels and criteria in consistency with the latest
international requirements. Some the steps in this process may take place sequentially, while
others may take place in parallel, in a different order, or as part of an iterative process,
depending upon the needs and decisions taken by the State.
Once the protection strategy has been developed, it will be necessary to establish emergency
arrangements (emergency plans, procedures and other arrangements), or to update those
already in place (in case they had existed before the protection strategy was developed), to
allow for effective implementation of the protection strategy. In case the State considers the
protection strategy as part of the national emergency response plan, once agreement has been
achieved on the protection strategy, other elements of the national emergency response plan
may need to be revisited to ensure that they are consistent with the protection strategy but also
that there are no overlaps. Emergency arrangements will then need to be tested in exercises.
However, before resources are allocated to do this, the protection strategy is expected to be
verified as complete and effective in achieving the goals of emergency response. The
interaction with interested parties through consultation is also necessary at different stages of
the development process.
Step 1: Designate the national coordinating mechanism to run the development process
A significant number of bodies or organizations may be involved in the response to a nuclear
or radiological emergency (e.g. operating organizations, response organizations and
regulatory body). It is therefore necessary to establish a coordinating mechanism at the
preparedness stage to oversee the consistent and coordinated development of the protection
strategy and its implementation. The coordinating mechanism needs to be a clearly defined
national agreement with well documented responsibilities, authorities and functions.
Consideration will also need to be given to possible emergencies with transboundary impacts
and the way in which relevant information can be obtained by neighbouring States and the
way in which they need to be involved in the development of the protection strategy to help
provide, to the extent possible, for a coordinated and consistent approach across borders.
The coordinating mechanism is expected to include representatives from each of the bodies or
organizations involved in the preparedness and response to a nuclear or radiological
emergency. In addition, as relevant, at times it may include additional organizations and
institutions that may hold information relevant to the planning basis, hazard assessment or
justification and optimization. Such organizations may be identified at the stage when the
need for specific information, which is available in certain organizations, is recognized, as
discussed in Sections 3 and 5, respectively. The coordinating mechanism can therefore be
established in different ways, including:
− An existing body or organization may be assigned to carry out coordination; lead
coordinator is designated within that organization; and representatives of other
organizations are assigned as representatives in different working groups (for example,
the working groups may be formed by elements of the protection strategy or different
postulated emergencies or any other way);
− An inter-ministerial/organizational body comprising representatives from all relevant
organizations, established as a committee, with a lead coordinator designated from
among them to oversee the overall process.
Whatever form the coordinating mechanism takes, its first priority is to prepare an action plan
for developing the protection strategy in accordance with steps given here, including: (a)
identifying which steps have already been fully or partially completed; (b) the timeframes for
32

completion of the various steps (including specific activities within each step); (c) possible
interactions and iterations of the process that may be necessary; and (d) the responsibility for
completing each step. The responsibility for supervising the implementation of the protection
strategy in various operational arrangements and for enforcing its implementation also needs
to be clearly stated and assigned.
In establishing the coordinating mechanism and its functions, it is recommended that States
take into account the experience they have with such mechanism being in place for
establishing their national emergency response plan or for whatever other EPR matter so as to
allow for the efficient work of the mechanism. This is of particular importance in the case
when the protection strategy is developed as part of the national emergency response plan.
Step 2: Complete the planning basis
The completion of the planning basis entails gathering various types of data and information
that support the development of the protection strategy, the identification of the hazards as
well as the development of overall emergency arrangements. It includes the data and
information discussed in Section 3.
Steps 1 and 2 need to be completed before any further steps can be taken. Step 2 may have
been undertaken for the purpose of developing existing emergency arrangements. If so, it is
expected that the planning basis are reviewed and completed, as necessary, to allow for the
development of the protection strategy in line with latest requirements and suitable
documentation of the process.
Step 3: Complete the hazard assessment
The hazard assessment consists of the identification of events that may lead to an emergency
associated with a facility, an activity or a source within the State, or affecting the State, and of
associated hazards with the aim of identifying the actions that may be effective in mitigating
these hazards and associated consequences. It includes characterizing various postulated
emergencies, assessing potential radiological and non-radiological consequences, identifying
areas and locations where emergency response actions may be warranted and assessing the
effectiveness and impacts of implementing various protective actions, in isolation or in
combination with others. The hazard assessment process and its outcomes are discussed in
detail in Section 3.
The most efficient manner of performing Step 3 is in parallel with the process of establishing
national criteria for implementing protective actions and other response actions and for
selecting the reference levels. However, it is recognized that some of the elements of these
processes may already have been completed and the various dosimetric criteria (see Steps 4 to
6) may already be part of established legislation and regulations or the national emergency
response plan. The same is valid for the criteria and measures for the protection of emergency
workers and helpers (see Step 7). Where dosimetric criteria already exist, it is necessary to
record their values, the basis on which they were established, and the process through which
they are to be applied within the protection strategy, in order to identify effective protective
actions and other response actions. In doing this, it is necessary to review the various criteria
to verify their consistency against results of the hazard assessment (see Section 3) taking into
account the fact that they might have been introduced at different times and providing for any
necessary revisions. In such cases, once this is completed and consistency confirmed, Step 3
would be followed by Step 8. In cases this exercise reveals a need for their revision and
update, the next steps have to be followed.

33

Step 4: Establish national reference level
This step involves setting the reference level for residual doses, considering the recommended
range in Requirement 5 of GSR Part 7 [2] and Requirement 44 of GSR Part 3 [1],
respectively. The concept of reference level, the way it is intended to be used within the
protection strategy and factors to be considered when selecting the national value for the
reference level are discussed in Appendix I. The way in which reasonable values can be
drawn at the national level, is discussed in Section 3 as part of the hazard assessment.
Step 5: Establish national generic criteria
This step involves developing national generic criteria in terms of projected doses and doses
that have been received for implementing specific protective and other response actions,
considering those recommended in Appendix II to GSR Part 7 [2]. The national generic
criteria need to be selected to allow for a staggered emergency response so that priority is
given to those at risk of sustaining radiation induced health effects in line with the UNSCEAR
2012 report [41]. They need to include generic criteria for doses
 For which protective actions and other response actions are expected to be undertaken
under any circumstances in a nuclear or radiological emergency to avoid or to minimize
severe deterministic effects;
 For which protective actions and other response actions are expected to be taken, if they
can be taken safely, in a nuclear or radiological emergency to reasonably reduce the risk
of stochastic effects;
 For which restriction of international trade is warranted in a nuclear or radiological
emergency, with due consideration of non-radiological consequences;
 To be used as a target dose for the transition to an existing exposure situation.
Discussion on generic criteria, what they present, how they are intended to be used within the
protection strategy, and their relationship with the reference level is provided in Appendix I.
Step 6: Establish the national operational criteria
Once national generic criteria have been established, it is necessary to develop operational
criteria to trigger emergency response actions as indicators that generic criteria might be
exceeded. Such operational criteria usually comprise of EALs associated with observable
conditions at a facility or an activity, OILs associated with directly measurable quantities
using radiation monitoring, and observable conditions at any site. Further discussion on
operational criteria is provided in Appendix I. Example EALs for light water reactors (LWRs)
are given in GSG-2 [9]. Methodology for deriving OILs and default OILs values are provided
in GSG-2 [9], GSG-11 [8] and Refs17, 38]. During this step, it is necessary to elaborate and
document the methodology used to calculate the default OILs as they may need to be
recalculated to take account of the specific conditions of the emergency, as it evolves. The
compelling reasons to recalculate OILs have to be determined and the process for
recalculation agreed among all concerned parties.
Step 7: Establish criteria and measures for protecting emergency workers and helpers
This step involves defining specific criteria and measures to be taken to protect the emergency
workers and helpers in an emergency. These measures and criteria might differ depending on
the assigned tasks. In determining different tasks to be assigned to emergency workers and
helpers, consideration has to be given to the protection strategy expected to be carried out and
34

arrangements to be put in place. It is noted that measures and criteria to be used for protecting
emergency workers and helpers assigned to different tasks might differ and this needs to be
well explained to all concerned parties. GSG-2 [9], GSG-7 [42] and GSG-11 [8] provide
guidance on protecting emergency workers and helpers in an emergency.
Step 8: Identify protective actions and other response actions that may be warranted
This step involves identifying which protective actions and other response actions may be
effective, either individually or in combination, in mitigating the range of expected
radiological as well as non-radiological consequences for each postulated emergency. This is
done using the results of the hazard assessment as discussed in Section 3. It will include
considerations of possible options that can effectively address expected consequences.
However, it goes further in identifying what additional action might need to accompany the
selected options. Namely, Appendix III provides details on the most common protective
actions, their applicability, strengths and weaknesses, and gives information concerning the
implication one particular action might have on the overall protection strategy.
Aspects of the protective actions and other response actions that have to be considered in this
step include the following:
- Which protective actions and other response actions would be appropriate to mitigate
the specific hazards identified and associated consequences, and the time frames for
decision making and for their effective implementation;
- The positive and negative impacts of implementing applicable protective actions and/or
other response actions as well as any limitations associated with their implementation
(see Appendix III for further information);
- The potential impact of protective actions taken earlier in the emergency on subsequent
actions;
- The need for justifying and optimizing protective actions to take account of the
prevailing conditions as the emergency evolves;
- The need for any differences among effective protective options appropriate for various
sites/areas, emergency scenarios and in different timeframes;
- The means to be used to adapt protective actions and conditions necessary to lift
applicable protective actions;
- The decision making process to be used to decide on specific protective actions and
other response actions to be taken;
- Means to assess the situation so that the effectiveness of actions and the strategy can be
judged, and further options can be pursuit.
Selecting best options for the protection strategy would need to consider justification and
optimization, with account taken of radiological as well as non-radiological factors. The
processes of justification and optimization need to be applied in an iterative process within
other steps as well. Justification and optimization are further discussed in Section 5.
Step 9: Identify any additional activities that may be required during the emergency
response
This step involves identifying various activities that may be warranted to support the
resumption of normal social and economic activity and concern the return to the new
normality and the well-being of affected populations. A comprehensive list of such activities
can be found in the prerequisites given in Section 3 of GSG-11 [8]. Example activities might

35

include: ensuring that the infrastructure and the public services are in place, establishing
public support centres, and restoring workplaces.
Step 10: Define the protection strategy for postulated emergencies
This step involves compiling and drafting the protection strategy comprising the identified
protection options, that have been justified and optimized, including defining the decision
making mechanism and the mechanism for its adjustment based on previous steps (in
particular Steps 3 and 8). The template provided in Appendix II can be used for this purpose.
Step 11: Identify how the justified and optimized protection strategy may impact other
related strategies
This step involves investigating what needs to be implemented during the response to enable
effective implementation of the protection strategy. It relates to identifying priorities
associated with various aspects of the emergency response, such as those related to radiation
monitoring and assessment, emergency management, public communication, waste
management and nuclear security, that will feed into related strategies or operational
arrangements. The results of this analysis need to be used to ensure that information required
for efficient decision making and public protection is collected in an effective manner during
the response. This ensures consistency, transparency and feasibility of the effective
implementation of the protection strategy.
Step 12: Consult various interested parties
This step involves consulting interested parties, including the public, on the protection
strategy to ensure that their feedback is considered and reflected in the strategy and to help
ensuring that the proposed strategy is acceptable and feasible. As with justification and
optimization, consultation happens at different stages and at different steps, depending on the
needs and not necessarily once protective options in the draft protection strategy have already
been proposed. In this way, others’ opinion can be timely factored into the draft protection
strategy.
The interested parties involved extend beyond the bodies and organizations taking part in the
coordinating mechanism. This process needs to be appropriate for the situation and to allow
for a suitable level of engagement. It includes providing interested parties with a rationale for
the options considered in the development of the protection strategy as well as the
consequences and limitations associated with the implementation of different protective
actions. In addition, interested parties need to be informed that, while the goal of developing
the protection strategy is to define a justified and optimised strategy for emergency response,
the protection strategy needs to be sufficiently flexible to be adapted to take account of the
specific conditions that exist in an emergency. Outlining the processes for making such
adaptations is an important component of the protection strategy. Further discussion on
consultation is provided in Section 6.
Step 13: Verify the appropriateness and completeness of the protection strategy and
finalize it
In order to finalize the developed protection strategy, its appropriateness and completeness as
well as its feasibility and practicability, the strategy needs to be verified. Such verification
activities could include comparison of the protection strategy with international
recommendations and with strategies that are recognized to reflect best practice. It may also
involve conducting tabletop exercises or workshops with participation from organizations
36

indicated in the protection strategy. These fora may consider testing the application of the
protection strategy against several example emergency scenarios (as identified in the hazard
assessment). This step includes addressing the lessons learned from the verification activities
and finalizing the protection strategy. Finalization may encompass its adoption at high levels
of the government for ensuring its enforceability. If the protection strategy is part of the
national emergency response plan, then this finalization will take place with the adoption of
the national emergency response plan. In this case, parallel to the development of the
protection strategy, revision of respective elements of the national emergency response plan
needs to be undertaken to ensure consistency and to avoid delays in the adoption of the
strategy.
Step 14: Present the final protection strategy to responsible authorities
Before starting to develop various arrangements to support the implementation of the
protection strategy, it is necessary to present the strategy to all those authorities responsible
for implementation of the protection strategy in the form of operational arrangements. This
process may include response organizations at national, regional and local levels as well as
operating organizations. It also includes decision makers and others who will have been
involved in some or all the steps of developing the protection strategy. The aim of this step is
to achieve a common understanding of the strategy and to facilitate the coordinated and
consistent implementation of the protection strategy in their respective operational
arrangements (e.g. emergency plans, procedures). It also provides an opportunity to clarify
and test the distribution of responsibilities and their practicability. Such presentation may take
form of a training activity or a workshop, and may utilize leaflets and other promotional and
information materials aimed at the staff of those organizations with relevant responsibilities in
the implementation of the protection strategy.
Step 15: Develop or update emergency plans, procedures and other emergency
arrangements at the national, regional, local levels and at operator’s level (as
appropriate) to implement the protection strategy
This step involves developing the emergency response capability at the preparedness stage.
As many States have had operational arrangements in place for many years, this step also
includes the revision of such arrangements to bring them in line with the final protection
strategy. It is important that this is done in a coordinated and consistent manner so that it will
not jeopardize the effectiveness of the protection strategy when implemented. If the protection
strategy is part of the national emergency response plan, then this step relays to other related
emergency plans, procedures and operational arrangements at different levels through which
the strategy is implemented.
Step 16: Test the emergency plans, procedures and other emergency arrangements
This step involves conducting various types of exercise against pre-set objectives to test
established arrangements that implement the final protection strategy and to identify
improvements needed. Such exercises have to be performed on a regular basis and to allow
testing of all critical functions within a specific timeframe (e.g. in five years). It also includes
ensuring revisions are made to adjust the emergency plans, procedures and other
arrangements, as necessary, to address findings from those exercises.

37

4.2. Considerations for developing the protection strategy implied from implementation
In an emergency, the relevant aspects of the pre-established protection strategy are
implemented through the pre-established emergency arrangements. However, recognizing that
an emergency is unlikely to be identical to any of the scenarios considered at the preparedness
stage, a capacity for flexibility and adjustment needs to be incorporated into the protection
strategy at the preparedness stage. This includes consideration of arrangements for: (a)
assessment, including the establishment of the relevant priorities for gathering information to
support decision making; (b) revision and application of criteria; and (c) processes for
adjusting or lifting protective actions or other restrictions. The level of flexibility, which is
provided in the protection strategy and, thus, in the associated emergency plans, procedures
and other arrangements, will strongly depend upon the time after the emergency onset, i.e. the
phase of the emergency response (see Fig. 5).

FIG. 5. Emergency response phases [8].
In addition, the protection strategy needs to be continually adapted during the response as the
emergency evolves (the adapted protection strategy, see Section 2), depending on the scale
and phase of the emergency and on the amount and type of information available. Means and
processes to be used for this adaptation are an important part of the strategy.
A range of temporal and spatial aspects needs to be considered when implementing the
protection strategy which may have an impact on the development of the strategy at the
preparedness stage as well. For large or prolonged releases, the impact of the emergency
differs from one area to another, potentially resulting in different exposure pathways
dominating in different areas (e.g. deposition, resuspension, ingestion) and different dominant
radionuclides. The range of received, projected and residual doses varies spatially, hence it is
to be expected that the optimum protective actions vary from area to area and with time, and
the protection strategy needs to reflect this. The protection strategy for implementation needs
to include a planned timescale for actions, broken down if necessary and where appropriate by
areas which are similar in contamination and/or dose.
In conjunction with considerations about the non-homogeneous spread of contamination, it is
possible that the pre-emergency demographic, economic, land usage and other factors will
vary with area, again potentially leading to different protective actions. Furthermore,
protective actions may be adjusted to take account of non-radiological factors (for example, to
avoid dividing a population group or a community, decision makers may prompt evacuation
over a wider area than what is expected based on the radiation monitoring results). It is
necessary to determine the likely impact of actions in one area on another area. This will
38

indicate whether it is necessary to implement actions in a particular order to reduce adverse
consequences in other areas. Issues such as discussed above might be faced in a response
when the protection strategy needs to be implemented and, thus, they need to be considered in
the development of the strategy and its justification and optimization.
4.2.1. Considerations for the urgent response phase
As soon as the emergency has been declared, prompt implementation of the protection
strategy is of paramount importance to provide the best level of protection under the
prevailing circumstances, even if very little information is available and uncertainties are
large. During this phase, the protection strategy needs to be implemented according to the
detailed emergency plans, procedures and other arrangements developed and agreed upon at
the preparedness stage and corresponding to the protection strategy. The focus needs to be on
the protection of those at highest risk for radiation induced health effects.
Urgent protective actions ideally are triggered by plant conditions (i.e. EALs) or other
observable conditions. The protection strategy for the urgent response phase needs to be
planned in detail at the preparedness stage to ensure its effectiveness, considering that during
this phase there is insufficient time for data gathering, consultation and adaptation and limited
information is available. Thus, it is essential that decisions related to the urgent response
phase are made at the preparedness stage and consider what is to be undertaken, when, where
and how.
However, it is recognised that specific conditions prevailing at the time during the urgent
response phase may require flexibility in the protection strategy to enable its safe
implementation. For example, severe weather conditions may render planned evacuation
unsafe. Thus, it is important to consider such factors at the preparedness stage and include in
the protection strategy in order to avoid the necessity of making unplanned adjustments in an
emergency. Example conditions that may require adaptation of the pre-planned protection
strategy during the urgent response phase include, but are not limited to:
− Destroyed infrastructure (e.g. by a serious natural event);
− Severe adverse weather conditions; and
− Unavailability of resources due to prior deployment for other purposes.
4.2.2. Considerations for the early response phase
As the emergency evolves and progresses into the early response phase, more information on
the circumstances leading to the emergency and its consequences become available. In this
phase, there is less urgency than in the urgent response phase, so improving the understanding
of the situation comes also in focus with the implementation of the public protective actions.
Moreover, the urgent protective actions taken need to be reconsidered at this stage to
determine whether the actions are appropriate and sufficient, and to adjust them as necessary.
It is at this time possible to begin to consider revising, justifying and optimizing the protective
actions, and the adapted protection strategy, taking into account:
− How the potential or actual situation varies from the most similar scenario assumed in
the basis for the protection strategy developed during the preparedness stage;
− How the situation may continue to evolve; and
− Whether protective actions and other response actions need to be adjusted or lifted (e.g.
if no longer justified).
The situation needs to be continually assessed in order to make informed adjustments about
the extent to which the protection strategy continues to be appropriate for the hazards posed
39

by the prevailing circumstances. Any adaptation of the protection strategy needs to be based
on an iterative process of justification and optimization that takes account of a range of
radiological and other relevant factors, discussed in Section 5. The objective needs to be to
ensure that the adapted protection strategy continues to do more good than harm and be the
best under the prevailing circumstances. The reference level may need to start playing a role
in this phase as a tool to guide further efforts and to help judging effectiveness of the
protection strategy implemented by that time. However, even during the early response phase,
there is likely to be limited time for comprehensive justification and optimisation, assessment
of effectiveness and consultation (see Sections 5 and 6) and, thus, more detailed planning for
the protection strategy might be appropriate for this phase as well. Still, some practical
aspects may call for attention at certain point of time during the early response phase.
Examples of such aspects are provided in Table 2.
TABLE 2. EXAMPLES OF PRACTICAL ASPECTS TO CONSIDER WHEN ADJUSTING
THE PRE-ESTABLISHED PROTECTION STRATEGY DURING THE EARLY
RESPONSE PHASE
Types of consideration
The current radiological or nonradiological situation

Examples of necessary information, when and if available
− Whether any individuals at immediate risk due to
radiological or non-radiological hazards.
− The current picture of the local region and infrastructure
and how has this changed from the emergency plan as a
consequence of the emergency.
− Estimates of projected and residual dose.
− The position with regard to agriculture and water supplies.
− The adequacy of the food and water supplies in areas where
restrictions are necessary and where people are present.

The actual conditions of the
emergency

− Prognosis of the future development (for example
termination of the release).
− Estimates of the activity/source term, in terms of current
releases and projected releases.
− Meteorology during any release of radionuclides and
current weather conditions and future weather predictions.

The protective actions that have
already been implemented

− The effectiveness of the implemented and planned
protective actions at reducing exposures in this
emergency.
− The uptake of the protective actions by the population.
− The potential for negative impacts from continuation of the
protective actions.

Whether or not the protective
actions
that
have
been
implemented can be lifted or
modified

40

− Whether or not the protective actions are still effective.
− Whether or not the protective actions are still justified.
− Whether any other required activities to facilitate lifting of
the protective actions have been undertaken.

Types of consideration
Whether any protective actions
within the protection strategy
are not yet implemented and
should
be
implemented
imminently

Examples of necessary information, when and if available
− Whether the required resources are available (human,
technical, financial) and on what timescale?
− Whether any past protective actions preclude taking
additional protective actions.
− Positive and negative effects and other limitations
associated with the proposed protective actions (see
Appendix III).
− For this particular emergency, what is the likely
effectiveness of actions in dose reduction (if the
effectiveness of an action is unclear, a pilot study may be
needed to determine whether it is appropriate for use on a
larger scale).

What protective actions are
under consideration for the later
phases of the emergency and
need consideration and planning
during the early response phase

− Preparations required for these (e.g. movement of
equipment and/or personnel).
− Optimum initiation timings of proposed protective actions,
relative timings and priorities in regard to the
implementation of each and also to existing protective
actions, applicability and priorities in each affected area.
− Collation of information on data for input to decisions on
recovery and decontamination (these are given elsewhere
but include resources available, estimated areas affected,
prioritisation of areas, estimated waste arisings and
disposal routes).

Other circumstances that may
be impacting the pre-determined
protection
strategy
and/or
arrangements

− Destroyed infrastructure due to a natural disaster.
− Severe and adverse weather conditions.
− Unavailability of resources due to their prior deployment
for other purposes.

Other considerations need also to be included in the justification and optimization processes,
such as (a) feasibility; (b) acceptability and public trust; (c) possible adverse psychological
and sociological consequences, as discussed in more detail in Section 5. The level at which all
these considerations are tackled during this phase will increase with time.
Throughout the early response phase, the protection strategy needs to be continuously
reassessed and adapted on the basis of the prevailing conditions, as the time allows for
effective protection of the public. The reassessment of the situation based on actual
circumstances may lead to decisions to lift protective actions that are no longer justified
and/or to implement new justified actions. The rationale for each adapted protection strategy
needs to be transparent, documented and communicated with relevant authorities and
interested parties. It is necessary to specify relevant criteria and to explain and justify changes
from the earlier protection strategy with reference to the conditions considered (including
radiological and other factors).
Any limitation to what and when can be done at this stage needs to be well thought and
reflected in the protection strategy for this phase.
41

4.2.3. Considerations for the transition phase
As the emergency progresses, there is a progressively greater understanding of the precise
nature of the emergency and the circumstances surrounding it. Therefore, decision making
needs to be based on actual conditions rather than pre-planned response, to a progressively
greater extent. It is expected that, before or during the transition phase, the emergency
situation is brought under control and that the radiological situation is characterized in detail.
This information may then be used to further adapt the protection strategy, as appropriate. At
this stage, it is possible to apply the justification and optimization processes more rigorously,
including consultation with interested parties. For large emergencies, there need to be an
increasing focus on activities to allow social and economic activity to resume.
All aspects for consideration in adapting the protection strategy outlined for the early response
phase also apply to the transition phase with the aspect of having more time to shape the
response better to the actual situation using all necessary means. Additional considerations in
the transition phase that need further consideration in the protection strategy include:
- Primary objective and prerequisites to enable the emergency to be terminated and allow
social and economic activity to be resumed as appropriate to the circumstances;
- The change in what acceptable reference level is to enable the transition to an existing
exposure situation.
As in the early response phase, it is important to ensure that any adaptations to the protection
strategy in the transition phase are transparent, documented and communicated with relevant
authorities and relevant interested parties, following agreed processes in the strategy at the
preparedness stage. As indicated above, it is necessary to specify the relevant criteria and
conditions considered (both radiological and non-radiological) in this process. Also, as for the
early response phase, various actions (individually or in combination) need to be appropriate
in the transition phase, and it may be anticipated that the adopted protection strategy needs to
be further developed in detail for different areas and with a clear timescale for each area
rather than this to be done in the strategy at the preparedness stage. It is important to ensure
that the reasons for changes in the protection strategy over time, for the circumstances of the
particular emergency, are clear and appropriately explained. Further guidance on factors to
consider in the protection strategy for the transition phase is provided in GSG-11 [8]. The
general and specific prerequisites provided in Section 3 of GSG-11 [8] help in identifying
possible actions and activities to be considered in the protection strategy for this phase.
There is less urgency associated with the transition phase than either the urgent or early
response phases. Therefore, the level of planning in preparedness for the transition phase is
less detailed than for the earlier phases, since there is more time available to adapt the
protection strategy to the particular circumstances. During the preparedness stage, it is
therefore important to establish a flexible general framework for decision making that may be
applied in the transition phase, taking account of the following priorities for this stage:
− Full characterization of the radiological and non-radiological situation;
− Adaptation of the protection strategy by means of comprehensive justification and
optimization processes, including consultation with interested parties;
− Facilitation of the resumption of social and economic activity with care given to the
well-being of those affected.

42

5.

JUSTIFICATION AND OPTIMIZATION OF PROTECTION AND SAFETY

The principles of justification and optimization are easily understood in their essence and
there appears to be a consensus on the considerations involved in justifying and optimizing
the protection strategy. However, there is less agreement and clarity on the processes
deployed at national levels to derive justified and optimized protective actions. States
generally apply informal processes during which emergency or crisis management
organizations tend to demonstrate a greater ability to consider non-radiological factors and
practical aspects in optimization than radiological protection professionals. This is linked to
their experience associated with the more frequent conventional emergencies for which they
are responsible for managing.
This Section aims to help States apply more formal processes for justification and
optimization and identify the information that needs to be gathered, the way this information
needs to be used, and the organizations to be involved for providing adequate input to support
informed decisions.
5.1. Introduction
Justification and optimization are important processes in both the development and
implementation of the protection strategy. In the context of an emergency or existing
exposure situation, these terms are defined in GSR Part 3 [1] and GSR Part 7 [2] as follows:
− Justification is “the process of determining … whether a proposed protective action or
remedial action is likely, overall, to be beneficial; i.e. whether the expected benefits to
individuals and to society (including the reduction in radiation detriment) from
introducing or continuing the protective action or remedial action outweigh the cost of
such action and any harm or damage caused by the action.” [1, 2].
− Optimization (of protection and safety) is “the process of determining what level of
protection and safety would result in the magnitude of individual doses, the number of
individuals (workers and members of the public) subject to exposure and the likelihood
of exposure being as low as reasonably achievable, economic and social factors being
taken into account (ALARA).” [2].
The process of justification is thus applied in deciding whether actions taken to reduce
exposures are likely to do more good than harm, taking account of both the disadvantages
(e.g. disruption) and the advantages (e.g. reduction in radiation risk) associated with their
implementation. Optimization is then applied to justified actions to ensure that the best is
achieved, under the prevailing (or assumed) circumstances, taking account of economic and
social factors associated with different means of implementing the justified actions. In other
words, while justification and optimization both involve taking account of the costs (or harm)
and benefits associated with implementing actions, justification requires that a net benefit is
achieved, while optimization further requires that the various components of cost and benefit
are balanced to achieve the best (or optimum) result, which may not necessarily be the one
with the lowest dose.
As mentioned in Section 2, the concept of the protection strategy, comprising a suite of
justified and optimized protective actions and other response actions, has evolved from the
previously recommended approach, outlined in GS-R-2 [5] and based on ICRP Publications
No. 60 [6] and 63 [7], in which interventions (i.e. individual protective actions) were
individually justified and optimized on the basis of the dose that is avertable by that action,
using the concept of intervention levels. In GSR Part 7 [2], taking into account the
recommendations in ICRP Publication No. 103 [10], the focus for justification and
43

optimization has been modified to encompass not only individual protective actions but the
overall protection strategy as well. Namely, justification has to be applied for individual
protective actions themselves as well as to the overall protection strategy (i.e. the combination
of protective actions) with the aim to ensure that the net benefit when combining individual
actions is not compromised. Justified actions and justified combinations of actions then need
to be optimized and incorporated within a protection strategy. Depending on the relation
among various actions considered, optimization may to some extent be possible for some
protective actions in isolation from other actions considered in the strategy, while in other
cases it has to be ensured that all actions in combination would result in the best outcome.
Justification and optimization are complex processes that involve taking account of a range of
considerations that call for inputs from various organizations or bodies. They therefore require
close collaboration among all the organizations with relevant responsibilities (including
operators, regulators and response organizations at different levels) that may own knowledge,
information or data on various aspects to be considered in these processes. Examples of the
factors that need to be taken into account in the processes of justification and optimization are
presented in Annex II to provide, among other things, a basis for identifying the organizations
and interested parties that need to be involved in providing relevant inputs to support making
an educated guess regarding the justified and optimized actions to be considered.
During the preparedness stage, the justification and optimization processes are applied to
develop a protection strategy for a range of postulated emergencies, resulting in a range of
potential consequences. This is a generic process, associated with significant uncertainties, for
example, in estimating the impact of an emergency. However, during the emergency
response, the justification and optimization processes are applied in an actual emergency. In
the urgent response phase, priority needs to be given to the implementation of a pre-planned
set of justified and optimized precautionary and urgent protective actions. When the
emergency progresses into the later phases, there is less urgency associated with
implementation of effective emergency response actions and an increasing amount of
information becomes available regarding the emergency and its impact. Only at this time, it is
possible and reasonable to review how effective the response by that time is, and to explore
through thorough justification and optimization processes what else can be done.
The process of evaluation, justification and optimization within the overall process of
developing and implementing the protection strategy is illustrated in Fig. 6.

44

FIG. 6. Illustration of the process of justification and optimization in developing and
implementing the protection strategy.

45

Figure 6 also illustrates the stages at which it is necessary to obtain information from various
organizations to make informed decisions. Step 1 was described in Section 3. The present
Section provides practical guidance on undertaking Steps 2 to 5 of this process. The factors
and considerations presented in Annex I have been expanded in the form of questions and
considerations related to the processes of justification and optimization in Tables 3 and 4,
referred to in Fig. 6 and elaborated in details in the relevant Sections below.
Figure 7 presents the process of justification and optimization in a simplified way,
highlighting its forward looking and iterative features for examining available options for
protection and safety and for adjusting the actions to obtain the best outcome.

FIG. 7. Iterative process of justification and optimization of protection and safety in a nuclear or
radiological emergency.

The processes of justification and optimization at the preparedness phase and during response
are explained in further details in Sections 5.2 to 5.4.
5.2. Justification at the preparedness stage
Paragraph 4.29 of GSR Part 7 [2] states: “Each protective action, in the context of the
protection strategy, and the protection strategy itself shall be demonstrated to be justified (i.e.
to do more good than harm), with account taken not only of those detriments that are
associated with radiation exposure but also of those detriments associated with impacts of the
actions taken on public health, the economy, society and the environment.”
Thus, the development of the protection strategy will involve ensuring that the protection
strategy as a whole is justified, taking account of the impacts of the individual protective
actions, which have themselves been justified for the range of possible emergency scenarios,
46

derived from the hazard assessment. When doing so, the justification needs to involve an
analysis of the benefit associated with the reduction in radiation detriment if the action or
protection strategy are introduced against the harm associated with introducing a protective
action or the protection strategy as a whole. The comparison between the gross harm and
gross benefit will then determine the net result. However, even if the net benefit is confirmed,
some circumstances may render some justified protective action impractical or unsafe, and
such consideration would form also essential part of the justification process.
In the development of the protection strategy, it is important to consider the way in which
individual protective actions can impact the applicability or efficiency of other actions and/or
may preclude the use of other actions. Alternatively, some protective actions may be more
effective in combination than the sum of the expected benefits for each measure in isolation.
For example, the combination of sheltering and iodine thyroid blocking can be useful
precursors to evacuation in some circumstances such as the simultaneous occurrence of a
natural event leading to widespread disruption of infrastructure.
When considering various justified protective actions that have clear net benefit, those actions
which aim at preventing health effects that can be attributed to exposure to ionizing radiation
either as an individual outcome (i.e. severe deterministic effects) or as a collective outcome
(i.e. increase in the incidence of radiation induced cancers among affected populations) have
to be given priority over actions which aim at further reduction of doses that are at levels at
which risks can only be inferred [41]. Because of the urgency associated with the
implementation of such priority justified actions, the precautionary and urgent protective
actions have to be well planned and optimized during the preparedness stage so that they can
be readily implemented safely and effectively during an emergency. In circumstances
involving high doses and high dose rates (e.g. above thresholds for severe deterministic
effects), protective actions and other response actions clearly bring benefit and, therefore, are
justified even if they can be disruptive.
At low doses and low dose rates, at which risks due to exposure to ionizing radiation can only
be inferred [41], the adverse consequences associated with the protective actions and the
protection strategy on the economy, society and the environment are likely to have a relatively
greater weight in the justification process then the benefit of reducing further the risk of
stochastic effects. Thus, making decisions on protective actions and the protection strategy in
situations involving low doses and low dose rates need to include considerations of a complex
range of factors and impacts to ensure that they do more good than harm.
Examples of adverse impacts associated with specific protective actions and the protection
strategy that need to be considered in the justification process may include: possible reduced
life expectancy due to stress associated with resettlement; possible effects of inadequate care
arrangements for the sick and vulnerable; costs associated with the loss of critical
infrastructures; loss of productivity of industrial facilities; costs associated with compensation
payments to those impacted; societal impact owing to the loss of places of great cultural or
historical importance; and costs to society and its economy associated with loss of businesses
or with the management of the radioactive waste generated.
In most, if not all practical situations, protective actions and the protection strategy will be
aimed at protecting a group of people. The protection strategy will be then considered to be
justified if it is expected to do more good than harm for most of the group.
An overview of some of the key factors and relevant considerations in the justification
process that States are advised to use in establishing formal approaches to justification are
presented in Table 3.

47

48

Timing

Radiation protection

Goals of emergency
response

Factors

Will this action result in the reduction of doses below
levels at which severe deterministic effects and/or a
significant increase in the incidence of cancer among
affected populations might be expected?
Will this action reduce the radiation detriment to affected
populations? How relevant is this reduction?
What will be the impact of implementation of this action
on the doses incurred by emergency workers?

Are there timing constraints on decision making for the
action and on its implementation?
How does the evolution of the emergency affect timing of













Why is the action in question being considered?
Will this action prevent individuals from being subjected
to a serious risk of death, severe deterministic effect or
long term health impact due to radiation exposure?
Will this action help mitigating non-radiological
consequences and/or facilitate protection of property and
the environment?




Examples of relevant questions













Specific actions identified in the hazard assessment as potentially
or actually effective in achieving the emergency response goals to
mitigate adverse consequences (see Appendix II to GSR Part 7
[2]). Such actions may be indicated by:
o Whether doses are projected to exceed generic criteria at
which protective and other response actions need to be
taken to avoid or minimize severe deterministic effects
and to reduce the risk of stochastic effects;
o Non-radiological consequences (e.g. adverse economic
and psychosocial consequences) that may require action.
In situations involving high doses and high dose rates, at which
health effects might be attributed to radiation exposures, the
benefit of taking protective actions will almost always outweigh
the adverse impacts from taking the action even if such actions are
disruptive.
However, in situations involving low doses and low dose rates at
which radiation risks can only be inferred, careful consideration is
needed to ensure that adverse impacts from taking protective
actions are outweighed by any benefit from further reducing the
doses.
Under some circumstances involving high doses, protective
actions may not be justified owing to fact that they cannot be
safely implemented at the time and thus, potentially causing more
harm than good.
In order to assess the effectiveness of the action at providing
protection against harmful effects of ionizing radiation to members
of the public while taking account impact on emergency workers,
appropriate methods of assessment need to be in place.
The timescale over which doses will be and/or are received need to
be considered so that any urgency in the decision-making process,
and any need for timely implementation of the action, may be

Examples of relevant considerations

TABLE 3: FACTORS AND CONSIDERATIONS IN THE PROCESS OF JUSTIFICATION

49

Economic aspects

Environmental
aspects







What the costs associated with implementing the action be
taking account of both direct and indirect costs?
How the proposed actions affect the economy (either due
to its implementation or the decision not to implement it)?
Will there be any associated economic disruption and, if

What are the likely direct or indirect impacts of the emergency
response on the environment?

Can the action being considered be practically achieved?
Will the proposed action affect other aspects of the
response to the emergency?

implementation of the action?

Examples of relevant questions


Efficiency/Feasibility 

Factors







identified and associated practicalities recognized. Relevant
considerations include:
o The stage at which the action needs to be taken in order to
be effective;
o The length of time it will take to implement this action and
how this timing relates to the timescale over which doses
are received.
The action may be desirable and most effective one, but it may not
be possible for it to be implemented in sufficient time to achieve
the expected benefits. This could be due to limitations in resources
and equipment or the deficiencies in infrastructure needed to carry
out the action being considered. This may also be due to the
impact this action has on other aspects of emergency response
jeopardizing the protection and safety of those who needed the
most.
Actions may, or may not, have an impact on the environment. For
example:
o Evacuating an area for an extended period might result in
a facility critical to protection of the environment shutting
down or becoming less efficient, resulting in a detrimental
impact on the environment (indirect impact);
o Remediation involving topsoil removal over large areas
will have a detrimental impact on the overall environment
(direct impact).
Each action to be implemented will bear some costs which may be
associated for example with resources utilized to take the action or
with further activities needed to manage the impacts of the action.
o Such impacts may relate to the local and broader
economy, and may include, for example, whether the
market for products unique to the region is permanently

Examples of relevant considerations

TABLE 3: FACTORS AND CONSIDERATIONS IN THE PROCESS OF JUSTIFICATION

50

Cross-border

Social and ethical
aspects

Factors

Do the actions and/or associated criteria take account of







Will this action have an impact on the overall lifestyle of
individuals? What would be the scale of disruption?
Will the proposed action have unintended individual or
societal consequences?
Does the action provide socially acceptable solution?



so, how significant would this be?

Examples of relevant questions







The length of time the proposed action is likely to be in place and
the associated impact it may have on the lifestyle of individuals
and on communities. Examples of further considerations include:
o Whether the action will prevent people from going to
work, attending schools, undertaking hobbies and
pastimes, undertaking normal social activities and so on
for an extended period;
o If the action will have associated psychological impacts
by, for example, requiring people to sleep in temporary
shared accommodation for extended periods, where they
are unable to take part in hobbies and pastimes, or to have
access to the internet and so be able to function normally;
Whether reduced life expectancy owing to stress with
resettlement is to be expected;
o Any social impact owing to the loss of places of great
cultural or historical importance.
The acceptability of the proposed action among members of the
public and other interested parties may influence the relative
effectiveness of different options. For example:
o Decontamination of food products will only be worthwhile
if such measures are likely to be accepted and the products
will subsequently be purchased. However, it is important
to note that decision-making remains the responsibility of
the authorities and that social acceptability ought not to be
the main driver in such decisions since this may lead to
taking unjustified actions, which may cause even greater
harm in the longer term.
Consistent response across borders, in case of transboundary

affected. Any impact on critical national or international
infrastructure or other economic or industrial activities
need to be analysed.

Examples of relevant considerations

TABLE 3: FACTORS AND CONSIDERATIONS IN THE PROCESS OF JUSTIFICATION

51





Taking the responses to all of the questions above into account, does the proposed
action do more good than harm?

Will any wastes be generated and, if so, what volume and
what characteristics of waste might be anticipated?
Are there any foreseen locations for the storage and/or
disposal of radioactive and other wastes arising from a
nuclear or radiological emergency?

possible cross-border agreements or commitments?

Examples of relevant questions

OVERALL QUESTION

Waste

coordination

Factors





Whether the expected benefits from taking the action or protection
strategy are significant and sufficient to outweigh all the adverse
impacts.
NOTE:
If this is not the case, or if the net benefit is only marginal, it is
necessary to consider whether any other action may be more
appropriate, in the context of the overall protection strategy, which
would result in a lower overall adverse impact.

emergency in particular may need to be considered for the same of
building trust and avoiding public concerns regarding level of
protection they are afforded.
The generation, management storage and disposal of radioactive
waste may also impact communities than those directly affected by
the consequence of the emergency and future generations as well.
The waste management will lead to extra costs which can be
significant impact on the economy. What wastes are likely to be
produced because of the action and how will they be treated and
disposed of will need to be analysed to help make informed
decisions for justified actions.

Examples of relevant considerations

TABLE 3: FACTORS AND CONSIDERATIONS IN THE PROCESS OF JUSTIFICATION

5.3. Optimization at the preparedness stage
Once justified, the protection strategy has to be optimized. Optimization is intended to ensure
that the best strategy under the prevailing circumstances is selected, i.e. maximizing the
margin between benefits and harm, taking into account the situation and associated
constraints. Optimization is the means by which the doses are reduced to a level that can be
considered ‘as low as reasonably achievable’ (ALARA) and this may not necessarily be the
level with lowest doses.
Optimization of protective actions and the protection strategy involves the evaluation and
balancing of a wide range of complex information and data, collated as a result of the
planning basis (relating to e.g. available infrastructure, demography, weather data) and from
the hazard assessment, for a range of likely consequences of an emergency associated with a
number of sites, facilities and sources. Optimization involves the consideration of the factors
and consequences associated with implementing a range of options for given protective
actions that thus includes more detailed practical considerations than justification. For
example, it may be determined that evacuation is justified, under certain circumstances.
Optimization involves considering the best way to implement evacuation, in the prevailing
conditions with the resources being available.
Optimization may mean that, while it may be possible to consider introducing disruptive, high
cost protective actions (for example evacuation) for a relatively small number of people, an
emergency affecting a much larger population might focus on a different combination of
protective actions, in view of the feasibility of undertaking such actions for large numbers of
people and the far greater level of disruption and cost involved. Any such consideration need
not to jeopardize the protection and safety of those to be or being exposed at levels at which
radiation induced health effects (severe deterministic effects or increase in the incidence of
radiation induced cancers among affected populations) can be observed.
Like justification, optimization involves a wide range of factors and considerations that are
presented in Table 4. It is worth noting that some factors are difficult to quantify in units that
allow a detailed quantitative cost benefit analysis. It is therefore necessary to express the both
quantitative and non-quantitative factors in a way that allows decision makers to address them
appropriately in formulating decisions. The priorities assigned to different factors can
markedly differ according to the region and the societal contexts, such that the outcomes of
optimization processes undertaken in different areas, regions or states, or at different phases
of the emergency, may differ. Table 4 can be used to identify the authorities that can bring
relevant inputs to these considerations to inform decisions on optimal options or approaches.
Features of the emergency that have a significant influence on the optimization process
include:
− Dominant exposure pathways as they help determining the types of justified protective
action to be considered individually and in combination so that all exposure pathways
are targeted at the same time;
− Timescales over which components of dose are likely to be received as this guides
informed decisions about the timeframes available to decide on and implement
protective actions;
− Factors impacting the effectiveness of individual protective actions and the protection
strategy need for combining various protective actions to allow for their effectiveness
and the associated resource implications;

52

− Social and economic impacts associated with the emergency itself as well as with
emergency response.
Whilst both individual and collective factors are considered in the optimization process, the
relative weight accorded to collective and individual factors varies depending on the
magnitude of the individual risk; when the expected individual risks are high, the importance
accorded to collective factors is reduced. In addition, when considering the impact of
collective doses in cases that exposures occur over large populations, large geographical
areas, or long periods of time, an ICRP recommendation needs to be considered that states
that in such circumstances “…the total collective effective dose is not a useful tool for making
decisions because it may aggregate information inappropriately and could be misleading for
selecting protective actions. To overcome the limitations associated with collective effective
dose, each relevant exposure situation must be carefully analyzed to identify the individual
characteristics and exposure parameters that best describe the exposure distribution among
the concerned population for the particular circumstance.” [43].
When optimizing the protection strategy, it is necessary to consider the possible protective
and other actions across all phases of an emergency response to ensure that the protection
strategy provides confidence that all the goals of emergency response continue to be achieved,
notably that:
− Doses that may result in severe deterministic effects are avoided;
− The risk of stochastic effects is reduced below levels at which an increased incidence of
radiation induced health effects would be observed; and
− The residual doses are kept ‘as low as reasonably achievable’ (ALARA), social and
economic factors taken into account.
The reference level was first introduced by ICRP [10, 43] as a tool for optimization of
protection and safety that applies also for emergency exposure situation. The reference level
is the level of dose above which it is not appropriate to allow exposures to occur and below
which optimization of protection and safety would continue to be implemented [1, 2]. The
reference level is to be used as a boundary condition for optimization of protection and safety.
In this context the term ‘constraint optimization’ is used [1, 10]. This would mean that, while
first priority is always given to actions that prevent or reduce doses that may lead to health
effects that can be attributed to exposure to ionizing radiation, at the next stage resource
allocation is such that priorities are then given to reducing exposures that are above the
reference level, to optimized levels (which are usually expected to fall below the reference
level), using justified response actions. Optimization will need to be applied at doses below
the reference levels as well, provided that justified actions to do so have been identified.
Finally, the process of optimization is aimed at achieving the most overall benefit, and not an
equal level of protection for every individual or community. This may lead to differences in
planning and implementation that may be difficult to explain.

53

54

Nature of
emergency

Legislation
regulations

Factors





the 





and 





How does the extent and nature of the release affect 
implementation of actions?
How does the size of the impacted area and/or the number
of people affected influence implementation of the
actions?
How does the implementation of actions interact with 
other actions being taken?



Legislation and regulations including any international legal
instruments, bilateral or multicultural agreements associated with
radiation protection, safety and with other areas, e.g. crisis
management to determine whether and how they might affect
implementation of various options and decision-making on these
options.
The residual doses associated with the options and comparison with
the relevant reference level to identify the options that provide the
best protection under the prevailing circumstances.
How any deviation from pre-planned options might be undertaken to
meet actual circumstances.
The effect of the following characteristics of the release on the
implementation of actions including the possibility for them to be
known, with sufficient accuracy, at the time of an emergency:
o Release start, effective height and duration;
o Source term involved.
Prevailing conditions at the time of emergency. For example,
frequently occurring conditions or those that have been present in past
emergencies need to be considered to allow for flexibility in the
operational arrangements. Once an emergency has occurred, the
actual conditions drive the optimization process, with due
consideration of the limited information available.
The areas impacted, number of people affected, available resources to
implement the actions and time needed to do so. For example, where
a large number of people are involved, an optimized approach may
suggest that phased implementation and/or a combination of actions
may be necessary to achieve the goals of emergency response (e.g. by
placing initial priority on those receiving the highest doses to ensure
that severe deterministic effects are avoided, to the extent possible).
The combination of protective actions that may be necessary;
delaying or bringing forward some actions or implementing actions in

Examples of relevant considerations

How does any relevant legislation and regulations affect 
the implementation of the actions?
Which options result in reducing exposure below a pre-set
reference level and gives rise to the greatest benefit?
Are the criteria flexible enough to accommodate
unexpected events or developments?


Examples of relevant questions

TABLE 4: FACTORS AND CONSIDERATIONS IN THE PROCESS OF OPTIMIZATION

55

How do external factors (such as natural events, other
relevant events, season of the year and weather
conditions) affect the feasibility of implementing any of
the options?
What effect do technical, social, environmental, economic



Efficiency



How does the expected duration of the action affect its 
implementation?



Timing



Which implementation option leads to the best protection 
under the prevailing conditions?



Radiation
protection

parallel may optimize the overall effect of response (e.g. by enhanced
effectiveness or by reducing the overall detriment associated with
implementing the actions).
An assessment of the exposure scenarios and dominant exposure
pathways (to the public and workers) associated with each option and
identification of options that result in the best protection under the
prevailing conditions. This involves taking account of:
o Levels of radioactivity present in the living environment
(dose rates, surface activity concentrations, activity
concentrations in samples);
o Levels of radioactivity present in food, milk and drinking
water;
o Levels of radioactivity present in non-food commodities;
o Dose to the public (projected doses, received doses, residual
doses); and
o Dose to the emergency workers and helpers.
The best protection under the prevailing conditions needs to be
judged by the ability to keep the number of individuals exposed, the
magnitude of doses and the likelihood of exposure ALARA, and not
based on the lowest possible dose.
The timescale over which doses may be and/or are received. For
example, considering if it is possible to implement some options in a
way that will reduce their longer-term impact (e.g. by making
arrangements to reduce the level of disruption and discomfort
associated with temporary accommodation).
Critical processes or infrastructure may be affected by external factors
and the impact and consequences this may have on implementing the
action. For example, an earthquake or severe weather conditions
might lead to damage or loss of infrastructure needed to access and
move people away from the affected area, and therefore affect the

Examples of relevant considerations

Examples of relevant questions

Factors

TABLE 4: FACTORS AND CONSIDERATIONS IN THE PROCESS OF OPTIMIZATION

56

Resources

Factors



















implementation of evacuation and, possibly, the relative effectiveness
of evacuation and sheltering.
Some factors, e.g. the weather, cannot be known in advance. These
may be considered by providing suitable flexibility in the operational
arrangements, by taking account of past experience, aimed at enabling
adaptation of the response to the actual circumstances. For example, a
severe storm at the time of the nuclear or radiological emergency
might render the evacuation unsafe and impractical.
The social acceptability of protective actions may impose limitations
on the options (e.g. extended duration of sheltering). There may also
be options for implementation that would increase the acceptability of
action (e.g. allowing time for making arrangements and moving or
sheltering with family members).
Efficiency of actions in reducing residual doses to below a
predetermined level or in decreasing the number of individuals
affected. Account need to be taken of the efficiency of processes,
technologies, etc. supporting the implementation of the action. For
example, the efficiency of ITB depends on distribution arrangements
and timing for its administration.
The impact of actions on other actions, raising the necessity for other
actions and rendering others ineffective etc.
The number of people needed to implement the option and the
knowledge and skills required and consequent exercise and training
needs.
The infrastructure needed to implement the options and the
infrastructure that is available, or could be made available, in order to
determine the best protection strategy and implementation of each
action. For example, transport and temporary accommodation
infrastructure will need to be identified, from those existing, for the
evacuation of people. While for waste treatment, storage and disposal,
facilities are needed that may not be available at the time.

Examples of relevant considerations

What human resources are necessary to implement the 
options?
What infrastructure is necessary for implementing the
options?

What materials and equipment are necessary for
implementing the options?
What financial resources are necessary for implementing
the options?
What logistical support is necessary for implementing the
options?

limitations have on the ability to implement each option?

Examples of relevant questions

TABLE 4: FACTORS AND CONSIDERATIONS IN THE PROCESS OF OPTIMIZATION

57



Environmental
aspects









Materials and equipment necessary for implementing the action and
those that are available, or could be made available, in order to
determine the best protection strategy and implementation of each
action. Examples may include stable iodine tablets for
implementation of ITB; specialised equipment, such as suitable
devices for radiation monitoring of foods in support of food
restrictions); trucks, buses etc. needed to move goods or people to
implement evacuation. Chemicals and other means/resources may
also be necessary for decontamination and decorporation.
The costs needed to implement each of the options, taking account of
the human and technical resources identified above. As an example,
the costs include the salaries of workers, the costs associated with the
purchase or use of the necessary facilities, equipment and materials.
The forms of logistical support required to implement each of the
options. For example, logistics needed to support communications
between emergency centres and the workers implementing the
actions, logistics needed to support the well-being of evacuees.
The characteristics of the local environment determine the impact
each option might have on the environment and the potential effect
the environment may have on the implementation of the options. (e.g.
on restrictions on local produce).
The characteristics of the local environment may also affect the
efficiency with which some actions may be implemented. Namely,
the type of affected area (e.g. urban, recreational, industrial,
agricultural, forest, etc.) influence the use people make of the area and
potential exposure pathways, which, in turn, have an effect on the
implementation of actions (e.g. the length or type of food restrictions
may depend on the proportion of agricultural land and forest in the
local area; the latter may be a source of semi-natural produce that may
retain higher levels of radioactivity and may therefore warrant

Examples of relevant considerations

How does the nature of the local environment affect or 
how would it be affected by the available options?

Examples of relevant questions

Factors

TABLE 4: FACTORS AND CONSIDERATIONS IN THE PROCESS OF OPTIMIZATION

58







Economic aspects







specific actions).
The geographical location of area and associated characteristics need
to be considered as they affect the implementation of options. For
example, the inaccessibility of mountain areas might affect the
movement of people e.g. during evacuation, and the proximity of the
sea in coastal areas might result in shipping or other restrictions
becoming necessary. The geology of the area
(groundwater
characteristics, soil type, etc.) affects, among other things, agricultural
practices and the balance of exposure pathways and the
implementation of protective actions, e.g. food restrictions.
The direct costs are those directly associated with the implementation
of the option. This is related to the identification of resources (noted
above). Depending on the option under consideration, these costs may
include: salaries of workers, costs associated with equipment and
additional use of infrastructure, consumables (fuel, food, heating etc.),
ongoing sampling and measurement costs, waste management costs.
The indirect costs are those that are indirectly associated with the
implementation of the option. These may include: the loss of revenue
from businesses in affected areas (for example during evacuation);
losses of use of other facilities (e.g. tourist sites arising during any
access restrictions); and costs associated with loss of confidence in
goods, e.g. foods subject to restrictions, and the consequent drop in
sales. The evaluation of these costs requires consideration of the
expected market response and its evolution with time.
Indirect costs may also arise from interruptions in international trade.
This may occur if an area associated with major trade routes, such as
a major port, is affected. It may be possible to consider
implementation of options that reduce the impact on international
trade (e.g. by providing alternative routes for supplies)
The basis for compensation costs are likely to be determined by
established liability regime.

Examples of relevant considerations

What are the direct costs associated with implementing 
the options?
What are the indirect costs associated with implementing
the options?
What compensation costs are associated with each
option?


Examples of relevant questions

Factors

TABLE 4: FACTORS AND CONSIDERATIONS IN THE PROCESS OF OPTIMIZATION

59

Waste





What are the quantities and types of radioactive waste 
related to the implementation of the options?
What effect does the availability of waste disposal routes
have on the implementation of the options?






The level of disruption in the lifestyle and living conditions, of
individuals and communities, resulting from the options. Very
disruptive options (e.g. large-scale evacuation) are likely to lead to
stress or psychosocial reactions, although it may be possible to
implement options in a way that reduces such outcomes.
The outcome of any consultation with interested parties on the
implementation of protective actions and their perspectives on the
relative acceptability of different options. However, it is important to
note that decision-making remains the responsibility of the authorities
and that social acceptability ought not to be the main driver in such
decisions since this may lead to taking unjustified actions, which may
lead to cause long term damage.
Socioeconomic aspects, including implementation of options to help
promote maintenance of public trust and credibility of authorities,
(e.g. related to the development of suitable communication strategies
associated with some actions and options).
Ensuring available medical care and other public services to allow for
the well-being of affected populations.
The volume and characteristics of different types of waste arising
from the implementation of different options in order to determine
whether there are significant differences that may influence the choice
of option.
The practical constraints associated with different options arising
from characterization; pre-disposal management and for minimization
of the amount of waste; and the availability of waste management
facilities.

Examples of relevant considerations

What level of social disruption is associated with 
implementing the options?
How does feedback from interested parties influence the
choice of options?
How can we compare and optimize factors such as

economic costs, dose reduction and social disruption?

Examples of relevant questions

Social and ethical 
aspects


Factors

TABLE 4: FACTORS AND CONSIDERATIONS IN THE PROCESS OF OPTIMIZATION

5.4. Justification and optimization in response
The approach to justification and optimization of protection and safety is likely to differ
between the emergency response phases and transition phase of an emergency, as well as
between the emergency response stage and the preparedness stage. The different approaches
are driven not only by the assumptions made at the preparedness stage (e.g. on the possible
evolution of the emergency) in contrast to the actual circumstances of a given emergency, but
also by considerations of timing to allow effective protection of the public and the amount of
information available to support decision making.
During the emergency response, doses incurred by individuals after the protection strategy is
implemented are compared against the applicable reference level. The use of reference level
in the response provides an opportunity to assess the effectiveness of the implemented
protection strategy and the need for its adjustment to address the prevailing circumstances.
With this adjustment, further protective actions (including the resources available at the time)
can be determined and implemented so that they focus on those groups/individuals whose
doses exceed the reference level, i.e. those who need such protective actions the most.
5.4.1.

Urgent response phase

The initial priority in the response is to implement precautionary and urgent actions to
prevent people receiving high doses and being exposed to high dose rates. Immediately
following the declaration of an emergency, the focus needs to be on the implementation of
precautionary and urgent protective actions based on observable or plant conditions and in
accordance with established emergency plans. These actions are justified and optimized at the
preparedness stage, and no further considerations to justification and optimization are
expected at this time. However, even in initial implementation, it may become necessary to
review the appropriateness of the pre-justified protective action or protection strategy before
progressing. For example, an earthquake or severe adverse weather conditions may have
destroyed or severely damaged transport infrastructure, making it dangerous to move people
as planned and to necessitate alternative protective actions to be taken. Such eventualities
need to be considered in the protection strategy at the preparedness stage, to allow for safe
and effective implementation in the response and without causing unnecessary delay.
5.4.2.

Early response phase

Once the adapted protection strategy (see Section 2) has been implemented, taking account of
the specifics of the situation, it is necessary to periodically reassess the situation to determine
whether the protective actions and the protection strategy continue to be justified (by doing
more good than harm) and to provide the best under the prevailing circumstances,
considering any new information that becomes available. Such a reassessment is particularly
necessary when there is a marked change in the release or in the information available, e.g.
about the pattern of deposition that could lead to a substantial revision of the adapted
protection strategy.
Once those most at risk have been identified and appropriate urgent protective actions have
been taken, there is a shift in priority from implementing the urgent protective actions to the
characterization of the situation and expansion or withdrawal of urgent protective actions and
implementation of early protective actions, based on limited justification and optimization
processes to account for any major deviation from the assumptions made at the preparedness
stage. The decision making process during the early response phase, including the
justification and optimization components, is presented in Fig. 8 as an iterative process.
60

61

FIG. 8. The iterative assessment process for decision making during the early response phase, including justification
and optimization processes.

5.4.3.

Transition phase

Once the emergency situation has been stabilized, medium and longer term considerations,
such as ensuring the conditions are met to lift protective actions and/or to return to normal
social and economic activity, become increasingly in the focus of the emergency response
[8]. Activities and actions planned and implemented in this period are likely to be less urgent
and subject to consideration of more reliable information that becomes available.
Thus, full justification and optimization are implemented during this time to ensure the
protection strategy does more good than harm at any time and provides for the best
protection. The process of adapting the protection strategy during the transition phase is
illustrated in Fig. 9. During the transition phase, emergency response efforts are increasingly
focused on restoring the functionality of communities, therefore requiring an optimization
approach that is necessarily emergency- and site-specific.

62

63

FIG. 9. The iterative assessment process for decision making during the transition phase, including justification and optimization
processes.

6. CONSULTATION WITH INTERESTED PARTIES
The success of response to any nuclear or radiological emergency depends not only on the
availability of well-prepared, comprehensive emergency arrangements or on the efficiency of
the protection strategy to limit the radiological impact and other consequences on the people
and the environment. Success also depends on the extent to which the public and emergency
workers adhere to these arrangements, which, in turn, depend on their acceptance of the
adopted protection strategy, and the arrangements put in place to implement it. The degree of
acceptance is enhanced by ensuring that interested parties6 are suitably informed and
consulted about the protection strategy at the preparedness stage and during response, where
this is possible without compromising the effectiveness of protective actions and other
response actions. The objective of consultation, the people consulted, and applied consultation
means depend on the stage or phase in which it occurs, as described in more detail in this
Section. Other general considerations, relevant to all forms of consultation are considered,
before describing those specific to each stage of consultation.
General considerations
6.1.1. Objectives of consultation
The engagement of interested parties in the development of the protection strategy at the
preparedness stage helps to ensure that the protection strategy addresses the concerns of the
local community, thus enhancing societal acceptance of the pre-planned protection strategy.
Furthermore, effective consultation contributes to building public trust in the credibility of the
authorities. It also helps to foster relationships with community leaders and to build and
maintain partnerships. Therefore, effective consultation promotes both the state of readiness
of emergency workers and enhance the community resilience7 to deal with a nuclear or
radiological emergency.
This highlights the importance of ensuring that, at the preparedness stage, interested parties
are sufficiently engaged to develop an understanding of the underlying rationale for the
protection strategy and the consequences and limitations associated with different protective
actions and other response actions. In the process, they also gain an appreciation of the
significance of building flexibility into the protection strategy to allow it to be adapted during
the early response phase and the transition phase to the specific conditions that exist at the
time of an emergency.
The effectiveness of consultation depends on all parties understanding the objectives of the
process and having realistic expectations of the outcomes. Some groups may have unrealistic
expectations, for example regarding the acceptable levels of exposure or contamination levels,
and the priorities of different groups may conflict with one another such that the available
resources might not be sufficient to meet all expectations. Therefore, although the emergency
management authorities need to consider the concerns and opinions expressed by interested
parties, it is important that their decisions are focused on delivering the highest possible
benefit for the community at large.
Active involvement of interested parties in the adaptation of the protection strategy during
response is also beneficial in promoting acceptance and empowering local groups to
6

An interested party is a “person, company, etc., with a concern or interest in the activities and performance of
an organization, business, system, etc.” [1].
7
Community resilience is the capacity of a community to be able to recover quickly and easily from the
consequences of a nuclear or radiological emergency [8].

64

undertake actions, as appropriate, thus enhancing the perception of autonomy among the
affected population. However, it is important to ensure, especially during response, that
consultation with interested parties does not unduly delay the process of adapting the
protection strategy or taking decisions to enhance the effectiveness of protective actions.
6.1.2. The interested parties
It is assumed that the relevant government departments, response organizations, operating
organizations and other authorities with a direct involvement in emergency preparedness and
response are involved in the development of the protection strategy. Other interested parties,
upon which the effective implementation of the protection strategy depends and who were not
directly involved in the early stages of developing the strategy, need to be consulted.
Examples of such parties include:
− Representatives of response organizations, which are not directly involved in supporting
the national coordinating mechanism or in the development of the protection strategy, for
example representatives from ministries or other governmental agencies at all levels;
− Representatives of various response organizations with responsibilities for operational
aspects of emergency response or recovery operations (e.g. police department, fire
department, civil protection, defense organizations), including employers or
representatives of designated emergency workers at all levels (including regional and local
authorities that will have the responsibility to implement established emergency plans on a
local level);
− Those who are or may be directly affected by an emergency at a particular location, such
as specific communities or groups of the population, representatives from industry (e.g.
food production sectors) and the population at large;
− Representatives of other States (especially neighbouring States) at national, regional and
local levels, that have entered into agreements providing for the exchange of information
concerning possible transboundary impacts and whose population might be directly
impacted by the transboundary consequences of an emergency;
− Representatives of ministries, other governmental agencies or regulatory bodies in other
States concerned with the import or export of certain food products, consumables,
materials or technologies.
The precise composition of the groups of consulted interested parties is likely to differ
according to the hazards identified in each State and the potential consequences of the
postulated emergency scenarios considered in the protection strategy. Moreover, different
interested parties may be involved in consultation during the development of the protection
strategy and associated arrangements and in their adaptation to reflect actual conditions as
they evolve during response. More local and site-specific involvement may therefore be
necessary in consultations on arrangements than on the contents of the protection strategy
itself. During the emergency response phase, the range of interested parties consulted need to
be selected on the basis of the specific characteristics of the situation (i.e. the type and scale of
emergency, the range of consequences, and the phase of the emergency response) and the
priorities for response.
6.1.3. The timing of consultation
As shown in Fig. 10, the extent of consultation differs markedly between the preparedness
stage and throughout the various phases of emergency response.

65

FIG. 10. Involvement of, and consultation with, interested parties during different phases
of a nuclear or radiological emergency [8].
During the urgent response phase, the effectiveness of protective actions and other response
actions is critically dependent on their urgent implementation such that there is insufficient
time to allow consultation to take place. Consultation is thus likely to be limited or nonexistent in the urgent response phase but would be expected to increase as the early response
phase develops and during the transition phase, as the situation stabilizes (see Fig. 10). It is
anticipated that progressively more consultation occurs as time permits, and as more
information becomes available for the full characterization of the situation needed for longer
term decision making. During the transition phase, it is possible to increase the involvement
of interested parties in the adaptation of the protection strategy, while not delaying its optimal
implementation.
6.1.4. The process of consultation
Effective consultation with relevant interested parties necessitates the establishment of an
appropriate communication mechanism. The processes for consultation need to be based on
the principles of transparency and inclusiveness by ensuring that all relevant and necessary
information is provided in plain language so that interested parties can form their own
informed opinions. Shared accountability and the development of measures (e.g. key
performance indicators) that allow the effectiveness of the process to be evaluated are also
essential. Finally, processes that allow for feedback to be accommodated in a timely fashion
in the overall decision making process also need to be considered in the consultation process.
Communication and evaluation issues are described in more detail in Sections 6.1.5 and 6.3,
respectively.
At the preparedness stage, while developing the protection strategy, mechanisms to consult
with interested parties about the elements that they consider need to be taken into
consideration in the formulation of the protection strategy and the associated emergency
arrangements (see Section 6.2.1). At this early stage, arrangements to interact with interested
parties during response also need to be defined and agreed (see Section 6.2.2) as part of the
protection strategy, so that they can be activated during response (see Section 6.2.3).
The different aspects of consultation are necessarily closely related, although their focus
differs according to their role within the context of emergency preparedness and response.
Furthermore, different consultation mechanisms may need to be established to consult with
different groups, at different times at the preparedness stage and during the response. For
example, different processes are likely to be appropriate for those potentially or actually
impacted by the consequences of the emergency and those with a more general interest.

66

Consultation mechanisms may take many forms, ranging from formal hearings (involving a
limited number of selected representatives) to public meetings (open to all or large target
groups). Consultation may also be undertaken on the basis of inputs from working groups
comprising representatives of associations, group leaders, or by open consultation utilizing
paper or electronic questionnaires. The mechanisms to involve and consult with relevant
interested parties from the local community need to be developed to allow for understanding
the particular nature of the community, recognizing the community’s specific needs,
expectations and capabilities.
The mechanisms used for consultation need to be clearly defined in terms of:
− The objectives of the consultation;
o Examples include obtaining feedback and views on the criteria for public protection
during the different phases of the emergency and on the actions that are considered
within the protection strategy.
 The targeted interested parties;
o Depending on the objectives and time of consultation, the targeted interested parties
may include a range of parties, such as those identified in Section 6.1.2.
 The applicable legal and regulatory requirements;
o These may include national legislation, international instruments, standards and
guidance based on best practice which call for consultation with interested parties;
o If relevant legal provisions do not currently exist, they need to be included in future
legislation and provisional arrangements need to be established in the interim.
 The timeframes for effective consultation;
o This includes taking account of the deadlines for successive steps of the development
of the protection strategy, the time necessary to collect, analyse and address the
comments and to provide the necessary feedback and presentation of a revised
protection strategy. The timescale available for the consultation during the
preparedness stage is longer than is feasible during the response to an emergency and
needs to lay the foundations for consultation and communications in response.
 Relevant documents to be published or otherwise made publicly available;
o These may include discussion documents describing proposed changes to relevant
legal documents, the rationale for the changes; draft regulations strategies and
emergency plans.
o Depending on the nature of documentation, it may be necessary to include an
executive summary in plain language to clarify technical content for a general
audience.
 Ways in which the interested parties may comment, directly or through representative
consultative bodies, on relevant documents;
o This may include electronically distributed and completed questionnaires with open
fields for other comments and papers submissions issues requiring feedback.
o The appropriate means need to be determined and arrangements for distribution, e.g.
by internet or post, need to be arranged.
 Possibilities for communicating with interested parties through appropriate means of
consultation;

67

o This may include public meetings, formal hearings, and interaction with focus
groups. The mechanisms appropriate at the preparedness stage may differ from those
applicable during the different phases of response.
o During the preparedness stage, it is necessary to identify the most appropriate means
for consultation including the range of invitees, the size and facilities for the venue,
recruitment of appropriate moderators for meetings or hearings.
 Arrangements for reviewing and assessing the result of the consultation;
o This will include identification of the authorities and expertise that need to be
involved in the process, and in the analysis of the feedback received and in proposing
appropriate means of addressing it.
 Provisions to consider the result of the consultation in the decision making processes;
o This will include defining final decision making processes to address the received
feedback, and providing feedback on how the issues or documents had changed as a
result of the inputs received during the course of consultation.
Some examples of the interested parties and the means of consulting them at the preparedness
stage and during emergency response are provided in Table 5.
TABLE 5: EXAMPLES OF THE INTERESTED PARTIES LIKELY TO BE CONSULTED
AT THE PREPAREDNESS STAGE AND DURING EMERGENCY RESPONSE, AND
THE MEANS OF CONSULTATION
WHEN

WHO

Various authorities and/or their
representatives not directly involved in the
development of the protection strategy
Emergency workers
Communities, associations, economic
organizations
Preparedness
General public
stage
Potentially affected populations
Authorities in neighbouring States
Authorities in other relevant States
Communities, associations, trade and
industry organizations
Various authorities or their representatives
Affected populations
During
response

General public
Authorities in neighbouring States
Authorities in other relevant States

68

HOW

Individual hearings, working groups
Working groups involving representatives,
web-based or paper questionnaires
Working groups with representatives, enquiries,
web-based or paper questionnaires
Enquiries, web-based or paper questionnaires
Enquiries, web-based or paper questionnaires,
public meetings
Bilateral or multilateral dialogues, meetings or
working groups, public hearings, working
groups involving representatives
International working groups (for example, led
by regional and international organizations)
Individual or small groups hearings (involving
representatives)
Individual or small groups hearings (involving
representatives)
Individual or small groups hearings (involving
representatives)
Monitoring of the media, information requests
to call centres, through local authorities
Audio- and videoconferences, exchange of
liaison officers
Audio- and videoconferences, response to
enquiries organized on international web
platforms, international working groups

6.1.5. Communication
In order to allow interested parties to take a meaningful part in consultation processes, they
need to be provided with suitable background information and, where appropriate, be
involved in discussion. This could be achieved in advance of consultation, particularly when
site-specific arrangements are under consideration. Alternatively, such information may be
provided in parallel with the consultation process as plain language background information
to explanations regarding suggested solutions for public protection. Examples of the types of
information include:
− The nature and characteristics of the local site and the possible consequences which
could arise as a result of an emergency, the way in which people and the environment
might be impacted and how they would be protected against harmful effects;
− Simplified conclusions from the hazard assessment if available and as appropriate. It is
unlikely that sharing detailed technical analysis of the hazard assessment would be
appropriate or helpful;
− Relevant aspects of radiation protection and emergency preparedness and response (for
example dose, health effects, the means of public protection in an emergency, the goals
of emergency preparedness and response, and the emergency arrangements in place),
depending on the needs of the targeted parties and the topic on which they are being
consulted;
− A description of the most probable protective actions which would be implemented in
the event of an emergency, their protection mechanisms, their efficiency and benefits,
their costs, drawbacks and limitation and possible alternatives if any;
− The constraints at national, regional and local levels, for example on available means
and manner evacuation (e.g. buses, external decontamination facilities);
− The expected contribution of targeted interested parties to the development and
effective implementation of the protection strategy, depending on their roles and areas
of concern. These would be expected to differ for example among local authorities,
rescue teams, teachers, representatives from food, agriculture, fisheries and other forms
of local commerce, international trade, tourism, environment. However, the
involvement of such parties contributes to ensuring shared accountability for the
effective implementation of the agreed suite of protection and safety measures.
It is necessary to take account of the fact that the representatives involved in the consultation
process are likely to change with time, and hence memory of previous information and
consultation cannot be assumed, and this information may need to be refreshed on an
appropriate timescale. Consultation may need to be repeated whenever the protection strategy
is revised or when significant changes are made to the associated emergency plans. Additional
consultation may also be necessary if there are changes in the structure of the community (e.g.
extension of a city, installation or reconversion of industrial plants). Suitable background
information needs to be provided in advance and during each consultation process.
During the consultation process at the preparedness stage, the results of the consultations need
to be communicated to the interested parties and to other groups, as needed. The protection
strategy and rationale, on which it has been developed, need to be widely communicated.
Communication strategies appropriate for specific groups of interested parties need to be
made available, as necessary. Transparent feedback also needs to be provided in a timely
fashion regarding the extent to which interested parties’ input has been integrated into the
protection strategy and the associated rationale.

69

During the emergency response phase, there is not much time for consultation but it is
important to provide information to interested parties on the specifics of the actual emergency
and the means to effectively implement the agreed protection strategy and any necessary
deviations from planned actions. In particular, it is necessary to provide information about the
geographical and temporal differences calling for diverse protective actions and other
response actions.
From the transition phase onwards, consultation processes are re-established to provide input
to the adaptation of the pre-established protection strategy to take account of the actual
circumstances. The rationale for these adaptations needs to be communicated appropriately
and in a timely manner. The aim during this period is to increase the level of engagement and
consultation with interested parties, while not compromising the effectiveness of response and
recovery efforts.
6.2. Consultation on the protection strategy during different phases
Consultation on the protection strategy during different phases is considered in this section,
namely:
1. Consultation at the preparedness stage on the protection strategy and on its practical
implementation in the development of relevant emergency arrangements (such as
emergency plans);
2. Processes for the engagement of and consultation with interested parties during
emergency response (primarily during the transition phase);
3. Consultation during emergency response, particularly during the early response phase
and the transition phase.
6.2.1. Consultation on the protection strategy at the preparedness stage
As stated in Section 6.1.1, the engagement of the interested parties in the development of the
protection strategy at the preparedness stage helps to ensure that the protection strategy
addresses their concerns, which fosters trust, credibility and societal acceptability of the preplanned protection strategy. It also helps to promote acceptance and the perception of
empowerment among the affected population and to enhance the community resilience for
dealing with a nuclear or radiological emergency. However, it is important to ensure that the
process of engagement and consultation does not affect the timely development of the
protection strategy.
Consultation on the contents of the protection strategy is likely to take place at a national,
federal or state level, while consultation on its implementation in the form of emergency
plans, procedures and other arrangements may include more region and site-specific
components. Therefore, different processes and people may be involved in these consultation
processes.
Consultation on the protection strategy includes representatives of governmental, regulatory,
industry and trade and response organizations, in addition to members of the public. The
issues of interest to these groups may differ, for example:
 The governmental bodies and other organizations would have an interest in the general
objectives of the protection strategy and the possible justified means to meet these
objectives and the optimized choice according to pre-identified emergency scenarios,
taking account of site-specific and local circumstances. These choices are also be the
subject of consultation with other interested parties, by means of an appropriate
mechanism.

70

 Response organizations would have an interest in, among other things, the identification
of emergency workers and helpers, their roles and responsibilities and means for their
protection, taking into account the available resources in manpower and equipment and
the benefits and exposures associated with the assigned responsibilities.
 Trade and industry groups would have an interest in the impacts of the emergency itself
and of the protective actions likely to be implemented on their business and the means
to minimize the impacts and to recover or compensate losses.
 Members of the public and their representatives would be interested in the means by
which they can be protected in an emergency.
The interested parties targeted to take place in consultation depend upon the objective and
topic under consideration. Consultation on the protection strategy itself is likely to include the
involvement of national or regional representatives of types of organization and public
interest groups (e.g. charities, for the protection of children, the elderly, and animals). On the
other hand, consultation on the emergency plans and arrangements developed to implement
the protection strategy may involve engaging members of the local communities or their
representatives, to take account of local conditions and site-specific considerations. For
example, the population living in an area within an emergency planning zone around a
nuclear facility are likely to be consulted to translate the protection strategy into specific
arrangements that are appropriate for the local circumstances. More examples are given in
Table 6.
Taking into account the potential for transboundary consequences of emergencies at (a) EPCs
I and II facilities, and (b) activities or acts in EPC IV events close to the States’ border, it is
likely to be necessary to establish bilateral agreements with neighbouring States to foster
cross-border coordination and, where possible, harmonization of approaches to emergency
preparedness and response. These agreements need to include mechanisms for information
exchange and consultation on the protection strategy, and emergency preparedness and
response in general, with official representatives at State and local level and with local
communities that might be directly impacted by the transboundary consequences of an
emergency in the neighbouring State. The consultation is likely to focus on designing a
common approach regarding protective actions which be applied on both sides of the border.
Consultations among States engaged in the import or export of foodstuffs and commodities
that may be impacted in an emergency are also necessary to define a coherent approach
regarding the control of food products and commodities. It is important that such
consultations include setting criteria for international trade, and that they build on those
consultations already occurring at the international level regarding international standards,
guidance and codes of practice.

71

TABLE 6. EXAMPLES OF THE INTERESTED PARTIES CONSULTED AT THE
PREPAREDNESS STAGE, THEIR PRIMARY AREAS OF INTEREST AND MEANS OF
CONSULTATION
WHO

PRIMARY INTERESTS

HOW

Various authorities and/or their
representatives not directly involved in
the development of the protection
strategy

The objectives of the protection strategy
and the possible justified means of
achieving them and optimized choices
appropriate for pre-defined scenarios

Individual hearings,
working groups

Emergency workers

Identification of emergency workers and
their roles and responsibilities and the
means employed for their protection in
an emergency

Working groups with
representatives

Communities, associations,
representatives from trade and industry

Working groups with
Potential impacts on specific businesses
representatives, enquiries,
and the means to minimize these impacts
web-based or paper
and to recover or compensate from losses
questionnaires

General public

How they will be protected in an
emergency

Authorities in neighbouring States

Protection strategy, criteria and
protective actions that may affect citizens Bilateral or multilateral
in neighbouring States or that may need
dialogues, meetings or
to be implemented in neighbouring
working groups
States

Authorities in any State

Criteria and approaches used to control
the import and export of foods and
commodities that may be impacted by an
emergency

Enquiries, web-based or
paper questionnaires

International working
groups (led by regional
and international
organizations)

6.2.2. Processes for engagement of and consultation with interested parties
As indicated above, during the early phases of an emergency, the priority is to quickly
respond to the situation. The time pressure is such that there is little or no time to interact with
interested parties. Thereafter, consultation processes in response are likely to involve those
parties that have particular responsibilities for aspects of emergency response or recovery
operations or who are directly affected by a specific emergency at a particular location. In
preparing for such processes, arrangements need to be made for the full range of emergencies
and for different locations.
During the early response phase, limited interaction is likely to take place with representatives
of local authorities (regarding adapting or lifting urgent protective actions, and for
implementing additional protective actions and other response actions) and with
representatives of sectors of the community or industry or trade groups, for example
education, hospitals, prisons or industry or trade sectors with limited buffer capacities (e.g.
dairy farming).
During the transition phase, the level of interaction with interested parties needs to increase
progressively. An increasing number of interested parties are likely to be involved due to the
gradual transfer of priorities from public protective actions to activities to promote the
resumption of normal social and economic activities in the affected areas.
It is also necessary to consider that following the widespread dispersion of a large release
(e.g. from an EPC I facility), the considerations and priorities may vary regionally, according
72

to the level of impact and the different characteristics of the different affected regions. It may
therefore be necessary to consult with different groups in order to prepare to adapt the
protection strategy to take account of the specific conditions of different areas.
During response, consultation between States, for example regarding issues such as the
control of radioactivity in aircraft, passengers and imported stuffs, needs to focus on adopting
a coherent approach facilitated by appropriate communication with interested parties in these
States at the preparedness stage.
To be efficient, it is essential that the arrangements for consultation in the early phases of the
response (i.e. in the early response phase and in the transition phase) are discussed and agreed
at the preparedness stage.
The following components of consultation need to be determined at the preparedness stage, in
order to allow for efficient and effective consultation during response:
− Responsibilities for initiating and ensuring consultation;
− Appropriate mechanisms for consultation that allow for progressively greater levels of
engagement during the early response and transition phases;
− Issues on which consultation is necessary in the early response and transition phases
(e.g. application of criteria the conditions to terminate an emergency);
− Identification of relevant interested parties, according to the expected evolution of
priorities and allowing for a balanced representation among relevant parties.
It is also necessary to engage the identified interested parties in a manner that ensures that
they agree and share a common understanding and expectations of the nature of consultation
during emergency response.
6.2.3. Consultation during emergency response
As indicated earlier, the type and degree of consultation will depend upon the situation and
the timescales for the consultation varies with the nature of the process and the phase of
emergency response.
In the transition phase, consultation becomes an increasingly important component of the
response actions and the consultation plan, established at the preparedness phase, may be
activated. However, it may also be necessary to consider whether the specific nature of the
emergency means that additional interested parties need to be consulted who had not
previously been involved at the preparedness stage.
Typical objectives of undertaking consultation during the transition phase are:
− To review and agree the implementation of conditions and criteria to be met to
terminate the emergency situation (following on from consultations at the preparedness
stage);
− To facilitate the transition process to the new normality (e.g. by preparing people for
return from evacuation and informing them of any restrictions necessary to facilitate
return);
− To improve coordination arrangements;
− To ensure sustainability of new arrangements;
− To support normal daily activities in the affected areas;
− To improve acceptance of adjustment of protective actions and other arrangements
imposed earlier in the emergency response; and
− To facilitate communication processes.

73

Examples of the interested parties likely to be consulted and their primary areas of interest are
provided below. The means of consultation during the different phases of emergency response
are summarized in Table 7.
− Governmental bodies and other organizations would have an interest in reviewing the
means used to implement the general objectives of the protection strategy to ensure that
they continue to be justified and optimized, taking account of the circumstances of the
emergency. A broad group of organizations would also have an interest in the
resumption of normal social and economic activities.
− Response organizations would have an interest in the managing the changing roles and
responsibilities of emergency workers and the means for their protection, taking into
account the exposures received, the resources available, and the evolution of conditions
during the various stages of the emergency and following its termination.
− Trade and industry groups would have a particular interest in the re-establishment of
normal social and economic activities and the measures taken to facilitate this.
− Members of the public and their representatives would be interested in the means by
which they are being protected and their effectiveness, the ways in which they could
improve their level of protection, for example by self-help actions, the support measures
available to them, including health care and psychological counselling, and the activities
to re-establish communities and normal social and economic activities.
TABLE 7. EXAMPLES OF THE INTERESTED PARTIES CONSULTED DURING
DIFFERENT PHASES OF THE EMERGENCY, THEIR PRIMARY AREAS OF
INTEREST AND MEANS OF CONSULTATION
WHEN

WHO

Urgent
Nobody
response phase
Local authorities
Early response Selected
phase
representatives of
critical sectors
(education, agriculture,
hospitals, prisons)

PRIMARY INTERESTS
-

74

No interaction

Defining and implementing necessary Videoconferences
protective actions for appropriate
Liaisons officers
populations and areas
Ensuring that the needs of special
groups of the population are
addressed in adapting the protection
strategy to the specific conditions of
the emergency

Communities,
Identification of activities necessary
associations,
representatives of trade for the recovery of economic activity
and industry

Transition
phase

HOW

Through the national or
regional authorities in charge
of the sector (e.g. ministry of
education, agriculture, public
health, justice)
Individual or small group
hearings (only
representatives)

Authorities in
neighbouring States

Continuing coordination regarding
adaptation of protection strategy (e.g.
return of evacuees)

Audio- and videoconferences,
exchange of liaison officers

Authorities in any
State

Continuing coordination regarding
criteria and means used to control the
import and export of foods and
commodities affected by the
emergency

Audio- and videoconferences,
response to enquiries
organized on international
web platforms, international
working groups

General public

Means of protection, including
following termination of the
emergency

Monitoring of the media,
information requests to call
centres, through local
authorities

Although the opinions of interested parties are useful input to adapting the protection strategy,
during the response, the ultimate authority and final decisions remain with the decision
making body or bodies. If some contributions to the process are not explicitly retained, for
example because of a lack of justification, feasibility, resources or conflicting interests, the
inputs and the rationale for not retaining them need to be documented.
6.3. Feedback on the consultation process and further improvement
At the end of the consultation process, it is good practice to consult the interested parties on
how successful or otherwise they perceive the process to have been. The results of the
consultation process may then be compared with the expectations of the participants at all
levels (authorities involved and interested parties). This feedback needs to be reviewed in
order to provide lessons for the future and a basis for improving engagement with interested
parties and consultation into the long term.

75

APPENDIX I
REFERENCE LEVEL AND GENERIC CRITERIA AND THEIR APPLICATION
WITHIN THE PROTECTION STRATEGY
I.1. Reference level
Reference level in an emergency exposure situation, introduced by ICRP 103 [10] and GSR
Part 3 [1], relates to the level of effective dose (a range of 20 to 100 mSv, acute or annual)
“above which it is judged inappropriate to allow exposures to occur as a result of that
exposure situation, even though it is not a limit that may not be exceeded”. Thus, it represents
an upper constraint on optimization. Namely, the reference levels are introduced as a tool for
optimization so that any “optimisation of protection shall give priority to exposures above the
reference level” with the possibility for the optimization of protection to continue to be
implemented below the reference level as long as this is justified, i.e. does more good than
harm. As a tool for optimization, reference levels have their roles in both preparedness and
response. However, there are some specifics in these roles. For an emergency response during
the urgent phase, there is no time for an optimization due to urgency associated with decision
making and implementation of protective actions in an effective manner. Therefore, a justified
and optimized protection strategy for the urgent phase needs to be considered and agreed at
the preparedness stage. However, as the emergency evolves (particularly towards the
transition phase), justification and optimization of protection need to take place and reference
levels are used for optimization.
During the emergency response, doses incurred by individuals after the protection strategy is
implemented are compared against the applicable reference level, thus providing an
opportunity to assess the effectiveness of the implemented protection strategy and the need
for its adjustment to address the prevailing circumstances. With this adjustment, further
protective actions (including the resources available at the time) can be determined and
implemented so that they focus on those groups/individuals whose doses exceed the reference
level, i.e. those who need such protective actions the most.
The decision to select specific numerical values for the national reference level remains the
responsibility of the relevant national authority [8]. This selection depends on a range of
circumstances, including national and local conditions (e.g. the prevailing economic and
societal circumstances, and the available national, regional and local resources and
capabilities), the phase of the emergency under consideration, the practicality of reducing or
preventing exposures, and the availability of options to reduce or prevent exposures. Thus, in
selecting the national reference level, it is necessary to consider the following:
− International recommendations and findings, notably the recommendations of the ICRP
[10], and IAEA safety standards [1, 2, 8];
− Scientific evidence of harm from ionizing radiation, such as the levels at which no
discernible increase in the incidence of radiation induced cancers are expected [41].
This helps in prioritizing actions (i.e. applying a graded approach) to protect the
affected populations before optimization can be considered;
− Results of the hazard assessment which help to identify the expected levels of projected
doses and residual doses and, therefore, help determining the range of residual doses
possible to be achieved with implementing the protection strategy;
− Uncertainties in the assessment of hazards, for example by allowing a sufficient margin
in the chosen value for the national reference level;

76

− Availability of options for reducing exposures below the reference level. The estimated
residual doses based on the hazard assessment help identify if there are available
protective actions to further decrease residual doses;
− Consistency between the national criteria (generic and operational) for implementing
specific protective actions and the national reference level;
− Practicability of further reducing or preventing exposures;
− Recognition of the evolution of the emergency. The residual doses are expected to
decrease as pre-planned response is implemented and may allow application of different
benchmarks at different times and different areas;
− The level at which reference levels for existing exposure situations are set, to allow for
a smooth transition from one exposure situation to another;
− The results of justification and optimization processes, taking account of socioeconomic impacts, acceptability and the need for transboundary coordination.
The reference level is expressed in terms of residual dose. This is the effective dose expected
to be incurred by an individual after protective actions have been fully implemented or in the
absence of protective actions if decided so (e.g. no actions taken or protective actions being
terminated). As elaborated in GSG-11 [8], the residual dose expresses the accumulated
exposure from the initiation of the event through a specified period of time, with account
taken of the implementation of the protection strategy, if any. For emergency exposure
situations that may result in exposure over a period of less than one year, the residual dose is
the total effective dose from all exposure pathways for the entire duration of the emergency.
For a large scale emergency resulting in longer term exposures due to residual radioactive
material in the environment, the residual dose encompasses the total effective dose from all
exposure pathways over one year from the onset of the emergency. For residual doses to be
used during the response, the total residual dose includes the doses received from all exposure
pathways (received dose) and the doses expected to be received in future (projected residual
dose), with account taken of the implementation of the protection strategy, if any [8].
I.2. Generic and operational criteria
Generic criteria and operational criteria are concepts within the protection strategy that are
required to be used to implement protective actions and other response actions in a nuclear or
radiological emergency, as described in GSR Part 7 [2], GSG-2 [9] and GSG-11 [8]. If the
projected dose or the dose that has been received in an emergency exceed the generic criteria,
then protective actions and other response actions, either individually or in combination, are
required to be implemented. The concept of generic criteria is superseding the former concept
of intervention levels. The generic criteria are expressed in terms of projected dose (i.e. the
dose that would be expected to be received if planned protective actions were not taken) and
received dose (i.e. the dose that is incurred after protective actions have been fully
implemented or a decision has been taken not to implement any protective actions) not only
for the effective dose but also for the equivalent dose to an organ or tissue and the RBE
weighted absorbed dose to an organ or tissue, considering which of these doses is indicative
of the radiation induced health hazard (this is an aspect that is not considered under the
concept of reference level).
Appendix II to GSR Part 7 [2] provides a comprehensive set of generic criteria to be
considered when developing a justified and optimized protection strategy at the national level,
including when establishing the national generic criteria. The generic criteria given in
Appendix II to GSR Part 7 [2] are considered to be generically justified and optimized and are
intended for application (a) when taking protective actions and other response actions to avoid
or minimize severe deterministic effects, to reasonably reduce the risk of stochastic effects,
and to mitigate the economic impact of an emergency by providing a basis for the resumption
77

of international trade, and (b) when guiding actions aimed at enabling the transition to an
existing exposure situation. These generic criteria are developed considering the UNSCEAR
2012 Report [41] and are grouped in two sets. The first set of generic criteria is associated
with doses received within a short period of time (acute exposures) for which protective
actions and other response actions are expected to be undertaken under any circumstances to
avoid or minimize severe deterministic effects. The second set of generic criteria is associated
with doses at which protective actions and other response actions need to be taken to reduce
the risk of stochastic effects.
The generic criteria that aim to avoid or minimize severe deterministic effects are associated
with doses that, based on the UNSCEAR 2012 Report [41], can result in deterministic health
effects in an individual that could be unequivocally attributed to radiation exposure. Hence,
these criteria, provided for RBE weighted absorbed dose to an organ or tissue, represent a
basis for taking precautionary protective actions and other response actions within the
protection strategy before or shortly after the release or exposures occur, primarily based on
observables or plant conditions. Taking effectively such precautionary protective actions
ensures that no deterministic effects that could be attributed to radiation exposure are to be
observed in any individual. Should doses at this level be assessed to have been received, then
they provide a basis for identifying the need for medical examination and screening followed,
as required, by medical treatment.
The generic criteria that aim to reduce the risk of stochastic effects are associated with doses
that, based on the UNSCEAR 2012 Report [41], can result in an increased incidence of
stochastic effects in a population that could be attributed to radiation exposure through
epidemiological analysis although radiation induced cancers cannot be unequivocally
attributed to radiation exposure on an individual basis. They are provided for effective dose
and for the equivalent dose to an organ or tissue. Hence, these criteria provide a basis for
taking urgent and early protective actions and other response actions within the protection
strategy, either based on observables or plant conditions or based on radiation monitoring
results. Taking effectively such urgent and early protective actions ensures that no increase in
the incidence of cancers that could be attributed to radiation exposure will be observed in a
population. Should doses at this level be assessed to have been received, then they provide a
basis for identifying the need for subjecting individuals for health screening and for longer
term medical follow-up to detect early and, hence, treat effectively specific radiation induced
cancers.
GSR Part 7 [2] and GSG-11 [8] address also protection to be provided at doses lower than the
above-discussed internationally agreed generic criteria, i.e. at low doses and low dose rates at
which the UNSCEAR Report [41] clearly indicates that increases in the incidence of health
effects in populations cannot be attributed reliably to radiation exposure. In this context, GSR
Part 7 [2] and GSG-11 [8] emphasize the need for thorough justification and optimization to
ensure that (1) the actions taken do more good than harm, social and economic factors being
considered, and (2) the protection is the best under the prevailing circumstances which is not
necessarily the option with the lowest dose. Should doses at this level be assessed to have
been received, there is no need for subjecting individuals to any medical follow-up in relation
to early detection and effective treatment of radiation induced cancers.
Operational criteria are associated with directly measurable quantities or observable
conditions and are based on the generic criteria. They are derived at the preparedness stage
and provide for prompt implementation of protective actions and other response actions
within the overall protection strategy without necessity for further assessments. The
operational criteria used in the emergency response include observable conditions on the site,
EALs and OILs [9]. An OIL is a set level of a measurable quantity that corresponds to a
78

generic criterion. OILs are typically expressed in terms of dose rates or of activity of
radioactive material released, time integrated air activity concentrations, ground or surface
concentrations, or activity concentrations of radionuclides in environmental, food or water
samples. OILs are used immediately and directly (without further assessment) to determine
the appropriate protective actions based on environmental radiation measurements. An EAL is
a specific, predetermined criterion for observable conditions used to detect, recognize and
determine the emergency class. Example OILs and EALs can be found in GSG-2 [9].
I.3. Dose concepts and their relation
The residual dose, projected dose and received dose, defined in this Appendix, are the three
dose concepts used for expression of the reference levels and the generic criteria.
The projected dose and the residual dose considered at the preparedness stage are presented in
Fig. 11 for illustration. They are expected to be calculated during the hazard assessment.
While the projected dose does not account for any protective action being implemented, the
residual dose accounts for the protection strategy in place. In this way, the residual dose
allows for planning of what doses might be received in the emergency provided that the
protection strategy is implemented effectively. Thus, the residual dose allows for identifying
an appropriate numerical value for the reference level to be used in optimization. The
difference between the projected and residual dose gives the avertable dose, a concept which
was used in the past to justify individual actions through the concept of intervention level [6,
7] but it is not used anymore.

FIG. 11: Assessment of the projected dose and the residual dose at the preparedness stage.

Once in an emergency, the doses that would be incurred after the protection strategy would be
implemented can be assessed (see Fig. 12). Should the protection strategy be effectively
implemented, the received doses are expected to be below the reference level for the residual
dose selected at the preparedness stage. The difference between the projected dose and the
received dose in this case provides the averted dose, a concept still in use when assessing the
effectiveness of the protection strategy and individual actions.

79

FIG. 12: Assessment of the projected dose and the received dose during the response.

When the protection strategy begins to be adapted and various response actions begin to be
considered for adapting and lifting, assessment of the residual doses during the response
would need to be used as a tool to assess the effectiveness of the implemented protection
strategy, to identify what else needs to be done, and to optimize further options. In such cases,
the residual dose would encompass the portion received by the time actions are considered for
adapting or lifting, as well as the portion projected to be received after actions are adapted or
lifted (see Fig. 13).

FIG. 13: Assessment of the projected dose, received dose and residual dose during the response.

The goal is that no such doses would be projected to be received in the future that would add
to already received doses and result in reaching dose levels at which radiation induced health
80

effects can be seen. The resulting doses would be planned to be kept below the reference
level. However, while the received dose can only be used in relation to identifying need for
any medical actions that may be warranted, the optimization further applies to the dose
projected to be received in the future.
I.4. Relationship between the reference level and generic criteria
It is a very common misconception that, in the case a State decides on selecting a national
reference level lower than 100 mSv, expressed in terms of residual effective dose annually,
this will require scaling down of applied IAEA generic criteria [2, 8]. However, scaling down
is not necessary in this case. As previously discussed, the reference level in terms of residual
dose accounts for implementation of the protection strategy and its planned adaptation, while
generic criteria in terms of projected dose do not consider any actions being taken. The
resulting residual dose depends on the efficiency of actions taken on the basis of the projected
dose (hence, generic criteria). If these actions are 100% efficient, then they result,
theoretically, in 0 mSv residual dose annually among the affected population (see Fig. 14).

FIG. 14: Residual versus projected dose.

However, in reality, each protection strategy has an efficiency lower than 100% and the
efficiency depends on the type of strategy implemented, resources available and other national
considerations. Depending on these national considerations, taking actions at levels of
projected doses at which IAEA generic criteria are established may result in various residual
doses to be achieved. This matter needs to be carefully analyzed during the hazard assessment
and development of the protection strategy, before the national reference level is selected.
Such analysis helps authorities to identify how effective is the proposed protection strategy
and what levels of residual doses could be achieved among affected population in an actual
response. Thus, IAEA generic criteria [2, 8] are compatible with the reference level selected
at any level of residual dose up to and at 100 mSv, provided that the analysis explained above
is performed during the hazard assessment and development of the protection strategy, and
that informed decisions are made based on this analysis.

81

APPENDIX II
OUTLINE OF THE PROTECTION STRATEGY DOCUMENT
TITLE (COVER) PAGE
The cover page needs to include the title of the protection strategy, the approval date, version
number and signatures of the responsible authorities at the governmental and other levels
who are responsible for preparing and implementing the protection strategy.
CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION
If merged with a national emergency response plan, some elements of the protection strategy
might be common for the plan and for the strategy, such as the background section and
planning basis and hazard assessment. This needs to be acknowledged at the beginning here.
1.1 Background
Describe what the protection strategy is. If necessary, give short description on the process
for developing the protection strategy, organizations involved in development and
coordination, consultations with interested parties implemented and consensus reached.
1.2 Objective and scope
Describe what the protection strategy aims to achieve, e.g. to provide common understanding
of the fundamental bases for emergency preparedness and response, including the principles
of protection, goals of emergency response. Define the scope of the protection strategy giving
consideration of the range of sites, facilities and sources present in the State and close to
borders. Indicate to what situations it is applicable.
1.3 Target audience
Identify the main target audiences. These are expected to include: national, regional and
local organizations involved in emergency preparedness and response. It is likely that
interested parties, including those from communities in the vicinity of relevant facilities, are
also interested and consulted; it is therefore important to present information in a manner
that is accessible to all parties.
1.4 Terms used in the protection strategy
Identify key terms used in the protection strategy here or reference to an appendix to the
protection strategy.
2. UNDERLYING GOALS AND PRINCIPLES
Elaborate the goals to be achieved by the implementation of the protection strategy and the
underlying principles taken into account in the development of the protection strategy. For
example, this could include the specification of the goals of the emergency response,
elaborated in GSR Part 7 and any additional or alternative goals identified by the Member
State; the principles of radiation protection and any other guiding principles such as
transparency and inclusiveness. These may be presented in subsections, as follows:
2.1 Goals of emergency response
Describe the goals to be achieved in the emergency response by means of the protection
strategy. This should include the goals associated with all the phases of the emergency
82

response, including the end goals, i.e. prerequisites to be met to enable the termination of the
emergency.
2.2 Radiation protection principles
Describe the principles of radiation protection that have been considered in the development
of the protection strategy. This is likely to include reference to the principles of justification
and optimization.
2.3 Other guiding principles
Describe other guiding principles that have been taken into account in the development of the
protection strategy. Examples may include: resilience, continuity and transparency. A brief
description of their relevance can also be provided as needed.
3. PLANNING BASIS AND HAZARD ASSESSMENT
Describe briefly what formed the planning basis for the development of the protection
strategy. As the planning basis and the hazard assessment need to be documented in detail
elsewhere, this is intended to be an overview of the key points that justify the scope and bring
clarity to broader audience.
3.1 Planning basis
Describe it briefly and in an easily understandable style; the more detailed documentation of
the planning basis can be suitably referenced, as needed.
3.2 Hazard assessment
Briefly describe the results of the hazard assessment. It might shortly describe the emergency
scenarios arising from the hazard assessment for which it was deemed appropriate to develop
the protection strategy. The results should be expressed in an easily understandable style; the
more detailed documentation of the hazard assessment can be suitably referenced.
4. STRATEGY FOR REGAINING CONTROL AND MITIGATING CONSEQUENCES ON
THE SITE
The detailed specification of responsibilities, criteria and actions considered for regaining the
control at the site and mitigating the consequences in case of facility, activity or source under
the responsibility of an operator are beyond the scope of this document. Nevertheless, here
short clarification should be given on main actions taken to protect individuals on site,
emergency action levels used (without specifying those that are site specific and are part of
the operator’s arrangements) and emergency classification system as relevant trigger for the
off-site response and the protection strategy, as appropriate.
5. PUBLIC PROTECTION STRATEGY
The public protection strategy has its specifics depending on the period of time after the
emergency onset it addresses. Thus, the public protection strategy is addressing the
emergency response phase and the transition phase separately.
5.1 Description of the emergency phases
Describe the period for which the protection strategy applies starting from when is it assumed
to begin (e.g. declaration of an emergency class), through the period when public protective
actions are implemented and to end (e.g. when the situation is under control and preparations
83

to resume normal social and economic activity are made), considering the specific each phase
has on the development and implementation of the protection strategy.
5.2 Decision making criteria
Provide an overview of the dosimetric criteria used to make public protection decisions in the
emergency response phase, including identifying any differences between those used to
initiate urgent and early protective actions, and, as needed, those associated with different
postulated emergencies. The issue of making any necessary modifications to decision criteria
also need to be described.
5.2.1 Reference Level
Indicate the level of residual dose at which the reference level has been set and provide any
additional information, as relevant, regarding its application during the emergency response
phase and the transition phase.
5.2.2 Generic criteria
Indicate generic criteria in place for a range of urgent and early protective actions including
brief description of their basis and the dose concepts and dosimetric quantities in which they
are expressed, as well as numerical values. For example, this description may include
application of the generic criteria in IAEA GSR Part 7. Provide any additional information,
as relevant, regarding its application during the emergency response phase and transition
phase.
5.2.3 Operational criteria
Describe operational criteria in place, emergency action levels, operational intervention
levels and observables/indicators, as appropriate, intended to trigger urgent or early
protective actions or other response actions. These are expected to be expressed in terms of
measurable quantities or observables (e.g. of plant or source condition). Provide numerical
values as well as any additional information, as relevant, regarding their application during
the emergency response phase and transition phase.
5.2.4 Prerequisites for terminating the nuclear or radiological emergency
Describe prerequisites that need to be fulfilled so that the emergency can be formally
declared ended. This may include reference to the primary objective to terminate the
emergency, to “facilitate the timely resumption of social and economic activity” and the
general and specific prerequisites described in Section 3 of IAEA GSG-11. Provide any
additional information, as relevant, regarding their application during the transition phase
for different postulated emergencies.
5.3 Process for assessing the situation against decision making criteria and for making the
decisions
Provide a brief overview of how decisions are taken and how this changes with time. Describe
the approach adopted to aid decision making (e.g. taking precautionary actions based on the
emergency class declared by the operator or based on observable conditions by first
responders which are then adjusted based on monitoring and assessment using other
operational criteria), taking account of decision making criteria and which radiation
protection and other factors are taken into account. Describe the process for assessment of
the effectiveness of the protection strategy and for its adaptation to meet the prevailing
conditions as the emergency evolves.
84

5.4 Process for adapting or lifting protective actions and other response actions
Describe the process, criteria and any relevant considerations to be used for adapting or
lifting protective actions and other response actions to take account of the evolving
emergency.
5.5 Protective actions and other response actions to be implemented
Describe the suite of public protective actions and other response actions to be implemented
for a range of postulated nuclear and radiological emergencies from the emergency onset by
the time the emergency can be terminated; address the radiological consequences assessed as
well as the non-radiological consequences addressed and the measures to be taken to
mitigate them, as needed. Identify the areas where the protective and other response actions
are planned to be implemented, e.g. the predefined emergency planning zones and distances
and the time allowing for their effective implementation. Any relevant considerations for
effective implementation of planned protective actions and other response actions need also
to be given.
5.6 Consultation with the public and other interested parties
Describe the approach and process for consulting with the public and other interested parties
in the course of the emergency response in relation to the protection strategy implementation
and modification. This needs to be aligned with the communication strategy and to take
account of the different priorities of the urgent and early response phase as well as for the
transition phase.
6. PROTECTION STRATEGY FOR EMERGENCY WORKERS AND HELPERS
6.1 Emergency workers and helpers
Define these groups of responders to an emergency. Bring briefly clarity on the responsibility
for their protection and safety.
6.2 Dose restrictions for emergency workers and helpers
Describe the criteria (such as the guidance values given in IAEA GSR Part 7 and GSR Part 3)
to be used to protect emergency workers and helpers in an emergency explaining how they
relate to different tasks and their relationship to different phases of response.
6.3 Processes for assessing the situation, decision making and adaptation
Describe the processes by which decisions regarding the protection of emergency workers
and helpers are made. Describe the approach adopted to aid decision making (e.g. use of
radiation monitoring and assessment data, results of hazard assessment) and which radiation
protection and other factors are taken into account. Briefly describe the means used to
determine the effectiveness of the actions and measures, for the protection of emergency
workers and helpers, and the process for adjusting such actions and measures if necessary.
6.4 Protective actions and measures to be implemented
Provide a brief overview of the protective actions and measures to be implemented for the
range of emergency scenarios that consider those for ensuring not only their radiation
protection but their well-being as well.
6.5 Communicating risks and doses to emergency workers and helpers

85

Provide a brief description on how risks and other information is communicated to
emergency workers and helpers in the course of the emergency response with a focus on the
use of a plain and understandable language.
7. SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
Provide additional specific strategic considerations necessary for the successful
implementation of the protection strategy, including links and references to other relevant
documentation.
7.1 Management
Describe what are the implications of the protection strategy on the management processes
and set priorities. Describe briefly how the emergency management structure intends to
support the implementation and modification of the protection strategy, including interorganizational interfaces for communication, sharing information, cross border coordination,
and communication with the international community.
7.2 Radiation monitoring and assessment
Describe what are the implications of the protection strategy on the radiation monitoring
strategy. Explain briefly priorities for radiation monitoring to facilitate the effective
application of the protection strategy, including the quantities to be measured; the locations
(e.g. emergency planning zones, sectors determined based on modelling) at which
measurements are necessary and the priorities are set for radiation monitoring. The factors
influencing priorities may be described briefly. This description should indicate how the
situation evolves with time as the emergency evolves and how radiation monitoring supports
effective decision making, as planned above in the protection strategy. Describe what are the
implications of the protection strategy on the assessment and prognosis processes and how
they are intended to support the effective implementation of the protection strategy.
7.3 Public communication
Describe what are the implications of the protection strategy on the strategy for public
communication so the latter can support the effective implementation of the protection
strategy. If a public communication strategy is in place, appropriate links and references can
be provided.
8. IMPLEMENTING
ARRANGEMENTS

THE

PROTECTION

STRATEGY

IN

OPERATIONAL

Identify the organizations that are responsible for implementing the protection strategy and
briefly describe procedures to ensure that emergency plans, procedures, and arrangements
are consistent with the protection strategy. Enforcement means can also be given here.
APPENDICES (AS NEEDED)
REFERENCES
ANNEXES (AS NEEDED)

86

APPENDIX III
OVERVIEW OF KEY PROTECTIVE ACTIONS AND OTHER RESPONSE
ACTIONS
This Appendix gives an overview of the key protective actions and other response actions in
a nuclear or radiological emergency. The key protective actions are those recommended to be
implemented if the generic criteria in GSR Part 7 [2] are exceeded; they include evacuation,
sheltering, iodine thyroid blocking, relocation, restrictions on consumption of food, milk and
drinking water, restrictions on use of non-food commodities, contamination control and
decontamination, and prevention of inadvertent ingestion.
While this Appendix focuses on the key protective actions, it also covers further
considerations for other response actions, including provision of information, advice,
psychological counselling and some medical actions.
The purpose of this overview is to help all those involved in developing the protection
strategy at the national level to consider relevant aspects in the strategy in relation to: (a)
implication of particular protective action on other protective actions and other response
actions, which need to be taken together or in sequence; (b) relevant criteria to be used in the
protection strategy to support decision making on the key protective actions including the
timeframe allowing for effective decision making; and (c) aspects related to expected
duration of imposed protective actions and their adaptation or lifting.
The overview also discusses some considerations relevant to the response (as they may have
implications for the protection strategy development) and to the preparedness (as they may
result in the strategy implications for the operational arrangements to be developed once
protection strategy is decided). These considerations are not intended to list all what is
relevant to consider but to give the authorities examples of the aspects that need to be taken
into account when developing the protection strategy and considering its implications for the
operational arrangements. Many other aspects that are local or site specific might also have
their relevance, too.
III.1. EVACUATION
III.1.1.

Description and objectives

Evacuation is the urgent removal of people from areas where they live and/or work to a safe
location in order to reduce the risk from some form of health hazard. In a nuclear or
radiological emergency, evacuation is the rapid, temporary removal of people from an area to
avoid or reduce short term radiation exposure [3].
By removing people from the location of the immediate hazard in a nuclear or radiological
emergency, evacuation protects them from all the exposure pathways. However, it results in
people being (compulsorily) moved to temporary accommodation, which is unlikely to be
suitable for residence for more than a few days.
Evacuation is a common form of intervention or protective action for public protection and
may be implemented on different scales, from a few people to large populations, in response
to various natural (e.g. flooding, earthquake, volcanic eruption, forest fire, hurricane, cyclone,
typhoon) or human-induced (e.g. fire, explosion) emergencies.

87

III.1.2.

Applicability domain and strengths

Evacuation is an urgent protective action that is expected to be temporary. If evacuation
cannot be lifted timely, then it needs to be substituted with relocation so that better living
conditions are provided to people.
Evacuation can be taken as a precautionary or urgent action to protect the population by
removing them from areas threatened or affected by a radioactive release or the presence of a
high activity radiation source. It protects individuals against all exposure pathways and is
particularly effective if carried out before any exposure has occurred (e.g. before a
radioactive release).
Evacuation may facilitate the implementation of other response actions (e.g. the removal of a
dangerous source or remediation) as well as the movement and activities of emergency
workers within the affected areas.
III.1.3.

Weaknesses and limitations

Evacuation is a very disruptive protective action, typically involving a significant disruption
of evacuees’ daily lives as well as of the social and economic activity within the evacuated
areas. It is also likely to be costly, depending on the number of people evacuated.
It might not always be practical or safe to evacuate people, for example in extremely bad
weather conditions particularly when there are a large number of people involved.
Furthermore, in tourism areas, the additional population may overwhelm the local means of
evacuation at certain periods of year, if not taken into account in planning.
Evacuation might be difficult, or even impossible, to implement for specific groups of people
requiring special care or equipment and specific vehicles (e.g. people who are unable to walk,
in retirement homes or hospitals, asylums or prisons) unless provisions are made in advance.
Evacuation of elderly people and patients in intensive care, for example, could result in
physical injury, further ill health or death that could not be counterbalanced by the reduction
in radiological risk associated with evacuation.
Planning for implementing this action needs to consider that additional staff, who takes care
of the patients or elderly as well as ensures that various parts of the critical infrastructure are
in a safe state, have to be designated as emergency workers and adequately protected. The
risk to them needs to be considered when justifying and optimizing this action.
If the situation is not appropriately communicated and controlled, anxiety and panic could
generate disorderly behaviour among evacuees, leading to traffic congestion and road
accidents, additional injuries and death. It may also lead to unwarranted evacuation from
areas where it is not recommended by authorities. This highlights the necessity for proper and
timely communication and provision of information. Moreover, if the process is significantly
delayed, evacuation may lead to people being highly exposed (e.g. during the passage of the
plume).
Despite mandatory evacuation orders, some people could refuse to leave their homes.
Providing for their care may call for authorities’ attention.
III.1.4.

Duration

Evacuation is essentially a temporary (few days to a few weeks) protective action and
evacuees need to be allowed to return to their home as soon as possible. However, depending
on the consequences of the emergency, the level of deposition, the expected evolution of the
88

contamination deposited over time, and the effectiveness of the protective actions, return of
the population may be delayed. If the evacuation cannot be lifted for whatever reason within
a reasonable period of time (few weeks), relocation needs to be considered in order to provide
the population with better living conditions.
III.1.5.

Timeframe for decision taking

To be most effective, the decision on evacuation needs to be taken before any significant
release of radioactive materials occurs or shortly after, even as a precaution.
III.1.6.

Decision making criteria

Generic criteria
Table II.1 (for RBE weighted absorbed dose in an organ or tissue) and Table II.2 (for
effective dose and for equivalent dose in the fetus in the first seven days) in Appendix II to
GSR Part 7 [2] provide the generic criteria for evacuation.
Operational criteria
Decisions on evacuation as a precautionary action need to be taken on the basis of observable
conditions at a site (i.e. observables) or plant conditions (i.e. EALs). Using such operational
criteria, evacuation can be automatically and precautionary taken within pre-set areas (e.g.
PAZ and UPZ for a nuclear emergency or inner cordoned off area for a radiological
emergency) upon declaration of the emergency class (e.g. general emergency or dispersal of
radioactive material in the environment). Examples of observables and EALs can be found in
GSG-2 [9].
As an urgent protective action, evacuation can also be taken on the basis of OILs, using OIL1
for a nuclear emergency (see Table 8 of GSG-2 [9]) once radiation monitoring results become
available. In case of a radiological emergency, OIL2 [38] (see also Table 8 of GSG-2 [9]) can
be used to trigger evacuation, considering that it may be possible to recover the affected area
timely without a need to further consider relocation.
III.1.7.

Considerations for implementation in response

For implementing evacuation, it is necessary that the authorities organize traffic corridors and
transport of people that have no means to evacuate, activate evacuation hubs, contamination
control and decontamination centres as well as accommodation/reception centres to be ready
to receive the evacuees. A functioning alarm system (e.g. sirens, public address systems,
phone calls, short message service (SMS)) to contact the populations concerned needs to be
used. Recommendations for evacuation need to be accompanied with any necessary
recommendations regarding administration of stable iodine, as appropriate, with instructions
to evacuees to collect their identity papers, valuables, medicines necessary for a period of a
few days etc. and with clear guidance on the evacuation routes and reception centres to
report. It is necessary to pay particular attention to alerting hearing and/or visually impaired
people. Decision needs to be made regarding evacuation of children at school, kindergarten
or nurseries, under the surveillance of their supervisors or to bring them to their families.
At the evacuation hubs, registration of evacuees need to be organized as well as provision of
medical and psychological support. When necessary, evacuees need to be easily redirected
towards contamination control and decontamination centres. The accommodation/reception
89

centres have to provide necessary equipment and stuff for people living there for, at least, a
few days. Arrangements for continuous provision of information regarding the event and any
next steps concerning their status also have to be in place.
Implementing the evacuation may necessitate putting in place means for coping with selfevacuation (when not planned as such) and shadow-evacuation as unwarranted action.
Personnel of various organizations assisting the evacuation, including those verifying that
people have been evacuated, ensuring safe shutdown of critical facilities, controlling the
traffic and caring for evacuees, needs to be designated as emergency workers and protected
accordingly. If helpers are allowed to assist the evacuation or the provision of care to
evacuees, their tasks have to be clearly pre-defined and they have to be protected as well.
Although justified evacuation can be staggered in time and space in combination with
sheltering, i.e. when and/or where evacuation is not practicable due to bad weather conditions
or by lack of means, authorities may need to delay evacuation and advise sheltering until
conditions for a safe evacuation are achieved. For example, depending on the available
means, evacuation of a large population may need to be executed gradually, starting with the
groups and/or areas most at risk and later extended to groups and/or areas less threatened, and
for which sheltering may be recommended instead for a short period of time.
In cases in which evacuation is ordered up to a given distance while sheltering is
recommended beyond this distance, especially if evacuation routes pass through areas subject
to sheltering, the sheltered population needs to be informed of the rationale for the process, in
order to facilitate effectiveness of such approach and to avoid self-evacuation. Depending on
the available time and/or transport means, priority may need to be assigned to the movement
of infants and children in kindergartens and at school, as the most vulnerable groups.
To ensure that people do not return until it is safe to do so, and to secure the evacuated areas
againstcriminal activity, the access to the evacuated areas needs to be controlled by the police
and/or the army. However, some re-entry arrangements might be necessary for short periods,
when appropriate, e.g. to allow evacuees to collect belongings, documents, medicines, or to
attend to the needs of pets and livestock. Check points need to be organized at entry/exit
points to register duly authorized person, to inform them about the conditions imposed by the
authorities and if needed, to check them for possible contamination. In forest and other
similar environments, especially in drought, the area needs surveillance to avoid the
occurrence of forest fires.
III.1.8.

Considerations for preparedness

Incorporating evacuation in the protection strategy imposes the necessity for a number of
arrangements to be made at the preparedness stage within operational arrangements (such as
emergency plans, procedures). Some of these arrangements, where appropriate, may include:
− An inventory of the population and communities and the number of people with
specific needs, of the available transport means (individual cars, public and private
buses);
− Pre-information provided to these population groups about how they are expected to
prepare for an evacuation and what to do before leaving their home (disconnect the
electricity, gas and water supplies, provide a few days of water and food for pets and
cattle, close windows and doors);
− Pre-information on the evacuation routes and destinations;

90

− Traffic plans taking into account local features (population, road network, accessibility
to vehicles) and the possible impact of e.g. poor weather conditions which defines the
evacuation routes, the paths to be cleared for rescue workers and check-points for the
radiation monitoring at leaving or entering the evacuated area;
− An inventory of the possible locations and infrastructure (e.g. public buildings, sport
halls, congress halls) for accommodation and their capacity for each emergency
planning zone, identification and arrangements for the installation of evacuation hubs,
control and decontamination centres, accommodation centres;
− Operational plans for the organization of these hubs and centres to provide an efficient
registration process, administrative, medical and psychological support, supplies of
medication, catering, clean clothes, accommodation;
− A robust mechanism to alert and warn the population;
− A clear agreement allowing the unambiguous identification of the buildings from which
the persons concerned have been evacuated; and
− A plan to control access to the evacuated area.
A well prepared and controlled evacuation can be performed in a quick way and without road
congestion, nervousness or injuries in possible traffic accidents. Good information provision
to the population around the nuclear installation in the preparedness phase is expected to
minimize the occurrence and likelihood of self-evacuation and associated drawbacks.
For populations located in an emergency planning zone (PAZ or UPZ), each family or
individual may be advised to prepare an individual emergency evacuation kit that is available
and easily accessible prior to the emergency. An emergency evacuation kit includes a
container of food, clothing, water, and other supplies that can be used to sustain the
individual(s) until the evacuation shelters are fully functional. During this time, evacuees may
suffer fairly simple conditions (e.g. limited clean water, heat, lights, toilet facilities, or
shelter), and the evacuation kit can help evacuees to face the experience with dignity and a
degree of comfort.
III.1.9.

Considerations for adapting or lifting evacuation

Because of the temporary nature of evacuation, priority has to be given to lifting this
protective action as soon as possible. If people are allowed to return to an area, their wellbeing is not endangered and it is possible for them to carry out their routine social and
economic activities. However, limited restrictions on normal living habits may still need to be
observed and might possibly extend into the longer term. The following considerations are
necessary when deciding on lifting evacuation (see GSG-11 [8]):
- In an evacuated area where the radiation monitoring results indicate that the projected
doses may exceed the generic criteria for relocation (i.e. the measurement results
exceed OIL2 of GSG-2 [9]), evacuation needs to be substituted by relocation to provide
better living conditions for evacuees.
- In an evacuated area where the radiation monitoring results indicate that the projected
doses do not exceed the generic criteria for relocation (i.e. the measurement results do
not exceed OIL2 of GSG-2 [9]), evacuation needs to be lifted if no or only limited
restrictions (e.g. restrictions on locally produced food or limited access to certain
recreational areas) continue to be necessary for those people living normally in the area.
In addition, the following preconditions need to be also fulfilled:
91

o Infrastructure and public services are in place (e.g. public transportation, shops
and markets, schools, nurseries, health care facilities, police and firefighting
services, water services, sanitation, energy supplies, telecommunication
networks);
o Clear instructions and advice on the restrictions still in place and the
recommended changes to behaviours and habits, including land use, have been
provided to those returning;
o Public support centre(s) and informational material (e.g. leaflets, posters) for
public reassurance and psychosocial support are available to those returning;
o A strategy has been established for the restoration of workplaces and for the
provision of social support; and
o Information on the likely evolution of the exposure situation and the associated
health hazards has been provided to those returning.
- In an evacuated area where the radiation monitoring results indicate that the projected
doses do not exceed the generic criteria for relocation (i.e. the measurement results do
not exceed OIL2 of GSG-2 [9]), but limited restrictions are not sufficient for the
protection of the people returning to live normally in the area, or the abovementioned
preconditions are not fulfilled, evacuation does not need to be lifted until this area can
be managed as being under an existing exposure situation, after fulfilment of the
prerequisites in Section 3 of GSG-11 [8] and of the abovementioned preconditions. OIL
for enabling the transition from an emergency exposure situation to an existing
exposure situation needs to be considered in this case as an operational criterion to
trigger discussion on lifting the evacuation (see GSG-11 [8]). Example OILT for a
nuclear emergency at an LWR is given in the Appendix to GSG-11 [8]. OILT for a
radiological emergency is given in Ref. [38].
The impact the lifting of evacuation might have on the residual doses needs also to be
assessed for informed decision making.
When substituting evacuation with relocation, evacuated people may be granted short term
access to the evacuated areas in a controlled manner, in order to allow for the preparation of
longer term relocation.
III.2. SHELTERING
III.2.1.

Description and objectives

Sheltering is the short term use of a structure for protection from an airborne plume and/or
deposited radioactive material [3]. Sheltering is an urgent protective action, used to provide
shielding against external exposure and to reduce the intake of airborne radionuclides by
inhalation. It consists of going inside a suitable building (a private house, a multi-storey
building, a commercial mall, a private or public shelter), closing doors, windows and vents,
shutting off all ventilation systems, listening to the information and further recommendations
and advice provided by the authorities, through the media or other means of communication.
III.2.2.

Applicability domain and strengths

Sheltering is considered and applicable during the urgent response phase, as a precautionary
or urgent protective action to protect the individuals in areas threatened by the passage of a
radioactive plume. In most situations, sheltering is easy to implement and does not involve
too much disruption of people’s daily lives. It is a relatively prompt and straightforward
92

action, which can be implemented in large areas and for a large number of people. Iodine
thyroid blocking may need to be applied simultaneously if radioactive iodine is expected to
be present in the release.
Sheltering can be implemented quicker than evacuation, necessitates fewer resources from
emergency response organizations and is easier to implement even in densely populated
areas. Sheltering can also provide an alternative to evacuation in cases in which immediate
and safe evacuation is not possible (e.g. in highly populated areas, for facilities and critical
infrastructure such as telecommunications centres, chemical plants, hospitals or prisons, or
whenever conditions make immediate evacuation impractical or hazardous due to e.g. severe
weather conditions).
Sheltering the population may aid the implementation of emergency response actions and
facilitate the movement and activities of emergency workers within the sheltered area.
Temporary sheltering might also be recommended beyond the urgent response phase while
later recovery options (e.g. decontamination) are implemented to facilitate the work of
emergency workers and to minimise any enhanced inhalation doses from resuspended
material from these activities.
III.2.3.

Weaknesses and limitations

Sheltering is not fully effective at preventing exposure: shielding and air tightness efficiency
depend on the type of shelter. Moreover, the degree of protection decreases with the duration
of the plume passage, the air renewal constant of the shelter, and the progressive
contamination of the inside atmosphere.
Prolonged periods of sheltering may cause stress, especially if families are separated or the
accommodation is not equipped for residential use. In addition, if sheltering is implemented
simultaneously with iodine thyroid blocking, the duration of sheltering might be limited by
the time the stable iodine provides protection, considering that the World Health
Organization (WHO) does not recommend second administration unless this is justified.
Thus, for practical reasons, this action cannot be prolonged for more than approximately two
days. Prolonged sheltering necessitates identification of those with specific support needs,
such as the youngest, the elderly or ill and disabled persons, and may call for additional
administration of stable iodine in case there is radioiodine in the release.
Sheltering in place might not be an option for groups that do not have access to adequate
shelters (e.g. tourists in mobile homes, caravans or tents, dockworkers or sailors in harbours,
scout camps), and they may need to be moved or evacuated whilst others in the same area are
not.
Areas with housings (e.g. simple wooden construction) that provide poor shielding against
radiation exposure might not be appropriate for considering sheltering for the population.
Evacuation might be an option in this case if this action is justified.
III.2.4.

Duration

Sheltering is a short term measure and can only be used for a short period (not more than 48
hours). In the case of a protracted release (expected to last for more than two days),
evacuation of sheltered people between two releases, or during periods of reduced release,
may need to be considered and carried out, if justified.

93

III.2.5.

Timeframe for decision taking

The decision to shelter population needs to be taken before any significant release of
radioactive materials occurs. It could be implemented as a precaution even when not much is
known about the situation.
III.2.6.

Decision making criteria

Generic criteria
Table II.2 (for effective dose and for equivalent dose in the fetus in the first seven days) in
Appendix II to GSR Part 7 [2] provides the generic criteria for evacuation which may be used
for sheltering as a temporary action until evacuation can be safely implemented. It may also
be possible that the authorities ask the population to shelter at lower generic criteria, to
facilitate the movement and activities of emergency workers and/or to be able to better
prepare for evacuation.
Operational criteria
Decisions on sheltering as a precautionary action need to be taken on the basis of observable
plant conditions (i.e. EALs). Using such operational criteria, sheltering can be automatically
and precautionary taken within pre-set areas (e.g. UPZ) upon declaration of the emergency
class (e.g. general emergency). Example EALs can be found in GSG-2 [9]. When evacuation
is not safe, sheltering may also be implemented on the basis of OIL1 of GSG-2 [9] provided
that the sheltering is done in large buildings that provide good shielding and away from walls
and windows.
III.2.7.

Considerations for implementation in response

To quickly implement sheltering, authorities need a functioning alarm system (e.g. sirens,
public address systems, phone calls, SMS) to contact the populations concerned. It is
necessary to pay particular attention to alerting hearing and/or visually impaired people. It is
possible to use radio, television and other media to provide complementary, and regularly
updated information and advice. Use of these channels allows limiting phone calls to urgent
calls.
Decision needs to be made to leave children at school, kindergarten or nurseries, under the
surveillance of their supervisors or to bring them to their families.
Those who do not have access to adequate shelters (e.g. tourists in mobile homes, caravans or
tents, dockworkers or sailors in harbours, scout camps) may be invited to shelter in public
buildings or, if not possible, evacuated instead. A system for the registration of individuals,
information, medical and psychological support needs to be organized for those in public
shelters.
If evacuation routes pass through areas subject to sheltering, clear explanations need to be
provided to the sheltered population to avoid panic reactions and self-evacuation.
The access to the sheltered area needs to be controlled by the police to avoid the entry of
people from outside the area (e.g. journalists), while authorizing people providing urgent
medical and other interventions.
The authorities may need to activate contamination control and decontamination centres
outside the sheltered area (e.g. in case of general emergency) to receive returning emergency

94

workers and possible self-evacuees and to be ready to provide information, contamination
control and, if needed, decontamination.
While sheltering is ordered, some outside activities still have to be conducted (e.g. milking,
safely stopping industrial processes) by workers who need to be duly informed of the risks
and to be provided with adequate instruction how to best protect themselves. In some activity
sectors, where shift work is the rule (e.g. hospitals, prisons), workers may be allowed to get
to their workplace although sheltering is in place.
The population needs to be advised that good ventilation of the shelter is necessary to clear
the inside air, which could be contaminated, and replace it by fresh air, once the plume has
passed.
III.2.8.

Considerations for preparedness

Planning for sheltering needs to consider:
− Identification of solidly constructed and reasonably airtight buildings that could serve
as public shelters for those population groups that cannot shelter in place (e.g. tourists
in mobile homes, caravans or tents, dockworkers or sailors in harbours, scout camps);
− Pre-information of these potentially affected population about what is expected and
how to prepare for effective and efficient sheltering;
− A robust mechanism to alert and inform the population of the need for sheltering,
including pre-signed conventions with telephone and broadcasting companies;
− Procedures and resources to maintain essential and urgent services (distribution of
stable iodine in case ITB needs to be implemented, access to water, energy, urgent
medical care, catering if needed) in the sheltered area; and
− A plan to control the access to the sheltered area.
Information leaflets need to be distributed to each family or household within the PAZ and
UPZ to urge them to identify one or more rooms with, whenever possible, access sanitary
equipment, water and communication means and to explain what to do and not to do, before
starting and during sheltering. The following actions could be suggested:
− Gathering family members and bringing pets inside;
− Gathering employees and workers together;
− Checking the isolation of the building and rooms (close doors and windows, stop the
ventilation systems, tight possible penetration such as broken windows);
− Making sure that stable iodine tablets, food, drinks, connection with the outside (phone,
tablets, PCs, TV, radio, portable radios on battery), medicines, and games for children
are available;
− Having a change of clothes prepared for those who are expected to arrive after the
release has started; and
− Preparing for potential evacuation if this becomes necessary by collecting identity
documents, documents of value, means of payment.
III.2.9.

Considerations for adapting or lifting sheltering

Sheltering is not intended to be carried out for long periods (i.e. more than approximately two
days). Before deciding to adapt or lift sheltering, the following aspects need to be considered:
− The evolution of the release;
− The level of contamination in the environment;

95

− The level of protection offered by the type of buildings used for sheltering (shielding
factor and tightness against diffusion of outside atmosphere);
− The need for continued simultaneous administration of ITB, and the medical care and
hygiene needs of those sheltered (availability of medicines, food supplies, etc.);
− Any necessity to gradually increase the time members of the public are allowed to
spend outdoors, before sheltering is fully lifted; and
− The need for further protective actions based on generic criteria and OILs to replace
sheltering (e.g. evacuation or relocation).
Depending on the evaluation, sheltering may be followed by the return to normal activities
(lifting of sheltering), the limitation of the outside activities (partial sheltering), or evacuation
or relocation of the inhabitants.
III.3. IODINE THYROID BLOCKING
III.3.1.

Description and objectives

Iodine thyroid blocking (ITB) is the administration of a compound of stable iodine (usually
potassium iodide) to prevent or reduce the uptake of radioactive isotopes of iodine by the
thyroid in a nuclear or radiological emergency involving radioactive iodine [3]. Iodine
thyroid blocking is an urgent protective action. The terms ‘stable iodine prophylaxis’,
‘thyroid blocking’ or ‘iodine blockade’ are sometimes used to describe the same action, but
iodine thyroid blocking is preferred in IAEA publications.
III.3.2.

Applicability domain and strengths

ITB is a protective action that is primarily considered and applicable during the urgent
response phase. It is an urgent protective action to protect the population in areas threatened
by a release of radioactive iodine. It is most effective if administered within a timeframe of
six hours before up to a few hours after the beginning of exposure. However, a later
administration after the beginning of exposure may still achieve a substantial dose saving in
the case of prolonged or repeated releases (see Section III.3.5).
During early response phase, ITB may be implemented in cases in which the consumption of
essential foods contaminated with radioiodine cannot be restricted, but only temporarily by
the time essential food is substituted or relocation is prepared, as appropriate.
ITB is a protective action that is relatively low cost, prompt and straightforward to implement
in large areas and for a large number of people, where stable iodine tablets have been
pre-distributed and are available at home or in public shelters where people are located. Side
effects are generally rare and benign. Pregnant and breast-feeding women, infants and
children constitute the priority target group because of their sensitivity to developing thyroid
cancers following internal exposure to radioiodine.
The WHO provides guidelines [44] for the implementation of ITB which can be considered
when planning and responding to a nuclear or radiological emergency.
III.3.3.

Weaknesses and limitations

ITB is only effective against intakes of radioiodine; it does not provide any protection against
external exposure of any kind or the intake of other radionuclides.
Distribution of stable iodine and maintaining the stocks can be costly, depending on the areas
to be covered and the population expected to be affected (e.g. within PAZ and UPZ). Where
96

tablets are pre-distributed to the population, the distribution might not have reached all
families or households or tablets might have been lost or thrown away. There may therefore
be some uncertainty about whether everyone has access to them in due time such that some
form of distribution in the emergency is likely to be unavoidable.
Efficiency is reduced if stable iodine is taken too early, e.g. in anticipation of a release which
then occurs later than expected. A reliable mechanism needs to be in place to deliver advice
on ITB at the appropriate time to the population of concern.
Different formulations are used for iodine tablets in terms of quantities of active product (e.g.
100 or 50 mg of iodine per tablet), so that the adult dose is one or two tablets, respectively. If
two different formulas are used in two neighbouring States, the recommendation to take one
or two tablets needs to be clearly explained to citizens on both sides of the border.
ITB is a short term protective action that is not normally be repeated or prolonged for long
periods; other protective actions (e.g. evacuation) need to be implemented instead.
Iodine is not considered to be an allergen. However, an acute administration of a large
amount of stable iodine (about 700 times the daily requirement) can cause temporary
symptoms such as minor skin rashes that disappear rapidly after the administration is ceased.
It has only very rare medical contraindications that are generally known by those concerned,
e.g. individuals with past or present thyroid disease (e.g. active hyperthyroidism), known
iodine hypersensitivity or dermatitis herpetiformis. Individuals having side effects, although
rare [44], after having taken ITB need to seek the attention of their doctor, but they are
unlikely to require further specific medical follow-up.
III.3.4.

Duration

Stable iodine is generally administered as a single dose that is judged be sufficient to give
protection to the thyroid for 24 hours [44]. In the event of prolonged release, when
evacuation is not possible or unsafe, repeated dosing might be judged appropriate to prolong
thyroid protection provided second dose is available to do so. Repeated dosing is not advised
for neonates, pregnant and breastfeeding women and older adults (over 60 years) [44].
III.3.5.

Timeframe for decision taking

The optimal period of administration of stable iodine is less than 24 hours prior to, and up to
two hours after, the expected onset of exposure. It is still reasonable to administer ITB up to
eight hours after the estimated onset of exposure. Commencing ITB later than 24 hours
following the exposure may do more harm than benefit (by prolonging the biological half-life
of radioactive iodine that has already accumulated in the thyroid) [44].
These limitations dictate the time that is available for decision making to implement ITB
effectively. Namely, the decision has to be taken before significant release of radioactive
iodine takes place in order to be most effective. This means that it could be implemented as a
precautionary protective action under certain circumstances depending on the hazard
assessment.
III.3.6.

Decision making criteria

Generic criteria
The generic criterion for taking ITB is 50 mSv equivalent dose to the thyroid (Hthyroid) due to
exposure to radioiodine only in the first seven days (see Table II.2 in Appendix II to GSR
Part 7 [2]).
97

Operational criteria
Decisions on ITB as a precautionary action need to be taken on the basis of observable plant
conditions (i.e. EALs). Using such operational criteria, ITB can be automatically and
precautionary taken within pre-set areas (e.g. UPZ) upon declaration of the emergency class
(e.g. general emergency) along with either evacuation or sheltering. Example EALs can be
found in GSG-2 [9].
ITB can also be taken in a nuclear emergency using radiation monitoring results, once
available, using OIL3 values [9] in case essential foods contaminated with radionuclide
cannot be restricted for whatever reason. In case of difficulties to provide substitutes to
essential local produce or milk supplies, their consumption might be authorized in
conjunction with the administration of ITB (and possibly together with other agents) to
protect against intake of radioiodine from such foods when radiation monitoring results show
OIL6 [9] values for radioiodine are exceeded. OIL3 for a radiological emergency is given in
Ref. [38].
ITB might be taken also in a nuclear emergency when OIL4 values are exceeded [9, 17],
depending on the timing the radiation monitoring of the skin is performed and in line with
WHO recommendations for appropriate timing for stable iodine administration to ensure
effective thyroid protection. OIL4 values for a radiological emergency are given in Ref. [38].
III.3.7.

Considerations for implementation in response

ITB is effective against internal exposure from radioiodine only and generally needs to be
implemented simultaneously with other protective actions (such as sheltering or evacuation
and restriction of contaminated food consumption) to protect people from other exposure
pathways and other radionuclides.
For timely administration of stable iodine, its pre-distribution is necessary particularly in
those areas which are expected to be affected during a radioiodine release at levels warranting
ITB to be taken (such as PAZ and UPZ). Depending on the characteristics of the areas,
population distribution and other factors derived from the hazard assessment, ‘predistribution’ may be associated with stable iodine tablets being provided to each household
(where efficient administration does not allow sufficient time for distribution in the course of
the emergency, e.g. in PAZ and UPZ, for cases of general emergency), stockpiles of tablets
being pre-distributed in different locations (e.g. pharmacies, city halls) within the country
where individuals and communities can go and obtain the necessary number of tablets, or
stockpiles of tablets are pre-positioned in different strategic locations from which rapid
distribution to households and communities can be organized in an emergency (e.g. in
potentially affected areas derived from the hazard assessment beyond the UPZ). A
combination of these options in different areas, depending on the distance from a nuclear
installation or applied in different phases, is also possible.
Each State needs to identify which of these options is the most appropriate for their situation
and needs to verify their effectiveness in an exercise. Individuals tasked to distribute stable
iodine tablets in the course of the emergency, if any, need to be considered as emergency
workers and protected as such.
To quickly implement ITB, authorities also need a functioning alarm system (e.g. sirens,
public address systems, phone calls, SMS) to contact the populations concerned. It is
necessary to pay particular attention to reaching population groups which are particularly at
risk, including infants and children at schools, in kindergartens or in nurseries, and those
responsible for these groups (teachers, nursery nurses).
98

III.3.8.

Considerations for preparedness

The authorities need to ensure that stable iodine tablets are pre-distributed within the PAZ
and UPZ with instructions for use, so that it can be rapidly taken upon declaration of a
general emergency, as soon as recommended by the authorities. Pre-distribution within these
planning zones is essential because it might not be possible to distribute the stable iodine
tablets during the emergency in the time required for them to be effective. The authorities
need to develop a plan to extend the distribution of ITB agents to areas beyond the UPZ, if
needed, unless stable iodine tablets are also pre-distributed in such areas at the preparedness
stage.
To cope with the fact that pre-distribution may not be fully effective, and that the distributed
tablets may have been lost, the authorities need to identify the best options for their rapid
distribution to those in need during the emergency, taking into account the available means
and time needed for distribution
Information and instructions on the use of ITB need to be prepared addressing following
question:
− How do the iodine tablets work?
− Who benefits from taking iodine tablets?
− When and how should the iodine tablets be taken depending on your age? (e.g. crash
the tablets between two spoons before mixing the obtained powder in drink water, milk
or fruit juice)
− How much stable iodine should be administered depending on your age?
− How many iodine tablets should be taken?
− Are there special warnings and precautions for use? (e.g. taking iodine tablets during
pregnancy or breastfeeding and undesirable side effects; warning of administration of
stable iodine tablets without the instruction by the authority)
− Where or how to obtain iodine tablets for those who are not in possession?
− How should the tablets be stored?
Public health authorities also need to verify the iodine dietary status of the population and
compensate with an adequate iodine prophylaxis if relevant.
To support effective implementation of ITB, various medical personnel, pharmacists etc.
need to be trained on ITB and in providing support to the population.
III.3.9.

Considerations for adapting or lifting iodine thyroid blocking

ITB is not a protective action to be implemented for prolonged periods, although under some
circumstances repeated administration of stable iodine might be considered. Whenever there
is a need to implement ITB for a longer duration (e.g. for several days), consideration has to
be given to implementing evacuation or relocation [8].
III.4. RESTRICTIONS ON FOOD, MILK AND DRINKING WATER
III.6.1.

Description and objectives

Restrictions on food, milk and drinking water relate to the actions taken to protect the food
chain and water supply systems (e.g. milk from grazing animals or drinking water using open
99

sources (such as rain water)) from getting contaminated in a nuclear or radiological
emergency as well as to the actions taken to protect individuals from ingestion of potentially
or actually contaminated food, milk and drinking water (such as locally produced vegetables)
in the emergency.
The end goal of taking this action is to prevent or reduce the internal exposure due to the
consumption of potentially or actually contaminated food products, milk and drinking water.
Actions on drinking water also avoid the contamination of food through the use of tap water
during food preparation or for rinsing.
III.6.2.

Applicability domain and strengths

Decisions on food, milk and drinking water restrictions might need to be made as early as in
the urgent response phase as well as during the early response phase. The restrictions can be
lifted during the early response phase (e.g. radiation monitoring may show that precautionary
restrictions taken during the urgent response phase are not needed anymore) or during the
transition phase but they may remain in place in the longer term within the existing exposure
situation.
Restrictions on food, milk and drinking water always relate to non-essential foods.
Restricting essential food, milk or drinking water could result in dehydration, severe
malnutrition or other severe health impacts; therefore, essential food, milk and drinking water
is to be restricted only if alternatives are available [2].
Restrictions on food, milk and drinking water are very effective in preventing internal
exposures from ingestion of contaminated food, milk and drinking water and, once
preparations are made, are relatively easy to impose.
III.6.3.

Weaknesses and limitations

Restrictions on food, milk and drinking water, especially if applied on a large scale and for a
long time, are a very disruptive protective action for the consumer, the producer and the food
industry. Uncontaminated substitutes need to be found at reasonable price to replace the
banned or restricted food products. If food is contaminated, it may remain so for a protracted
time, leading to difficulties in lifting food measures and potentially prolonged economic
impact.
Considerable volumes of contaminated waste can be generated through restrictions on the
marketing of crops, milk and meat. In the absence of sufficiently diversified water sources
(especially a mix of water sources between surface and ground water), and depending on the
interconnectivity of the water supply network, provision of alternative supplies can take a
long time before they are available and is expected to be rather costly. Individuals on private
water supplies, especially those reliant on rainwater, are potentially more vulnerable to
contamination and need specific considerations.
Some uses of mains water supplies for non-culinary uses, such as flushing toilets and floor
cleaning, might be acceptable but this may be difficult to explain. Non-culinary uses such as
watering garden or cattle need to be considered with regard to the potential radioactive
contamination of vegetables, in particular leafy vegetables, and animal products.
Information and communication are essential to support effectiveness of imposed protective
actions.

100

III.6.4.

Duration

Restrictions on food, milk and drinking water have to be initiated as soon as possible in the
urgent response phase. These restrictions could remain in place in longer term (even within
the framework of an existing exposure situation).
III.6.5.

Timeframe for decision taking

To be most effective, decisions to protect the food chain and the water supply systems from
getting contaminated in a nuclear or radiological emergency need to be made before or
shortly after the release. Such restrictions are precautionary. The restrictions could then be
adjusted as radiation monitoring is deployed and results are obtained. Namely, once detailed
characterization is performed (later in the emergency response), it is necessary to identify
where and for what food restrictions are either justified in the longer term or can be lifted.
III.6.6.

Decision making criteria

Generic criteria
The generic criteria for food, milk and drinking water restrictions are given in Tables II.2,
II.3 and II.5 in Appendix II to GSR Part 7 [2] as follows:
 Effective dose/Equivalent dose to the fetus and embryo of 100 mSv in the first seven
days and 100 mSv in the first year/during the full period of in-utero development, all
exposure pathways considered, to be used for implementing restrictions on food, milk
and drinking water as either urgent or early protective actions before sampling and
analysis are performed and usually as a precaution due to limited information available
at the time.
 Effective dose/Equivalent dose to the fetus and embryo of 10 mSv in the first
year/during the full period of in-utero development, only ingestion pathway considered,
to be used once sampling and analysis are performed to provide a basis for
discontinuing restrictions imposed on food, milk and drinking water as a precaution
earlier in the response.
 Effective dose/Equivalent dose to the fetus and embryo of 1 mSv in the first
year/during the full period of in-utero development, only ingestion pathway considered,
to be used once sampling and analysis are performed to provide a basis for imposing
restrictions on the international trade8 of food, milk and drinking water.
Operational criteria
To be most effective, decisions to protect the food chain and the water supply systems from
getting contaminated in a nuclear or radiological emergency need to be made on the basis of
the prevailing conditions at the facility (i.e. EALs or upon declaration of the appropriate
emergency class). Additionally, precautionary restrictions on food, milk and drinking water
(e.g. locally grown vegetables, milk from grazing animals, drinking water from open sources)
may need to be considered in addition to those taken on the basis of EALs (before sampling
and analysis can be performed) and on the basis of simple radiation monitoring results using
OIL3 (see GSG-2 [9] for a nuclear emergency and Ref. [38] for a radiological emergency).
8

Criteria for restricting the international trade of food, milk and drinking water are set in consideration of nonradiological impact (such as economic) the nuclear or radiological emergency may have. They are intended to
provide a basis for resuming the international trade in the aftermath of the emergency and, thus, to minimize
the economic losses.

101

Once sampling and analysis are performed, depending on the strategy (including factors such
as areas impacted and resources available to allow for effective protection of the public
against ingestion pathway), OILs need to be used to identify where and for what food
restrictions are either justified to remain in place or can be lifted. In some cases (e.g.
intentional dispersal of radioactive material causing food contamination or contamination of
drinking water supply), OILs (including OIL3) need to be used to judge radiation safety of
the food, milk and drinking water for consumption. In the case that limited resources are
available, the following OILs can be used as screening criteria before a detailed analysis can
be made:
 OIL5 of GSG-2 [9] for any nuclear or radiological emergency; and
 OIL7 of Ref. [17] for marker radioisotopes in a nuclear emergency at an LWR.
Results from detailed analysis need to be compared against OIL6 of GSG-2 [9], for any
nuclear or radiological emergency, to judge the safety of food, milk and drinking water for
consumption.
Guidance values given in the Codex General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food
and Feed (CODEX STAN 193-1995) [45] provide operational criteria in terms of activity
concentrations to be used to appropriateness of the food intended for international trade.
III.6.7.

Considerations for implementation in response

Early in the response, it is necessary to make every effort to prevent local produce, milk from
grazing animals, etc. from getting contaminated. It may be challenging for decision makers to
see the importance of such precautionary measures even before the release has started,
patterns of deposition are known and/or radiation monitoring results are available, but failing
to do so results in needs for managing contaminated foodstuff and biological radioactive
waste later in the response.
The effectiveness of restrictions of consumption for the contaminated food, milk and drinking
water very much depends on to what extent farmers, agriculturists and others conform with
the recommendations and instructions provided to them. Extensive radiation monitoring may
also need to be deployed in releasing the precautionary actions and deciding what foods are
not safe for consumption. Further measures on how to deal with contaminated foods need to
be considered. Certification may be needed as a measure to reassure the public in the safety
of foods from affected areas. Further then the certification, considerations also need to be in
place to address possible unwarranted actions, such as rejection of food products coming
from the affected areas, so that the economic impact can be mitigated.
To avoid the production of foodstuffs contaminated above admissible concentration levels,
agricultural remedial actions might be considered as early as during the transition phase, such
as (deep) ploughing, top soil removal, increased application of fertilizers or amendments. If,
despite of agricultural countermeasures, food restriction is expected to remain in place for a
long time, an interdiction of production of food products could be decided upon, possibly
involving a drastic conversion of the land use and agricultural production in the affected area.
Substitution of animals’ diet with uncontaminated feed, adoption of a selective grazing
regime or movement of animals to less contaminated pasture before slaughter is particularly
effective at reducing radionuclide transfer to animal products. However, the supply of clean
feed to animals has an economic impact. If an alternative supply of clean feed is not
available, drying the dairy cows, moving the cattle to non-affected areas or even slaughtering
are possible options.
102

Drinking water companies need to be ready to stop pumping water from affected reservoirs
and to replace supplies by using alternative water sources. Authorities need to initiate the
production and distribution of packaged water supplies to affected populations.
Interdiction or restrictions on collecting wild products (mushrooms and berries) may also
need to be considered. Such restrictions need to be accompanied with clear instructions to the
people that explain what wild products are not to be consumed and what wild products can be
consumed under certain conditions (e.g. in terms of how they can be prepared to be safe for
consumption).
In general, providing advice and information, as well as radiation monitoring for reassurance
and support to the public for self-help actions, may be helpful and relatively inexpensive.
III.6.8.

Considerations for preparedness

It is important that authorities, together with all concerned and interested parties (e.g.
producers’ unions, food industry) develop the approach for ensuring food safety as part of the
protection strategy and to also consider the replacement of banned or restricted products, the
compensation of producers and the management of banned products as conventional or
radioactive waste, as appropriate. Options for the management and disposal of large volumes
of biodegradable waste also need to be identified in planning.
Drinking water companies need to develop a plan for the replacement of banned water
sources, the protection of water reservoirs and a possible modification of the water treatment
processes, as response actions. Authorities have to prepare for distributing packaged water to
the affected populations.
A good information and communication system for the public, the producers and the
associated professional organizations, and an effective consultation mechanism with all the
concerned parties are essential. Effective consultation during the development of the
approach for ensuring food safety helps in ensuring feasibility of its implementation in an
emergency. This is of particular importance not only in relation to efficient implementation of
the agreed actions during the response, but also to adapting and lifting the restrictions
imposed on food, milk and drinking water. Namely, any changes in the restrictions imposed
earlier in the response would be very much impacted by the acceptance of the public, food
industry and retailers or, as appropriate, other States.
III.6.9.

Considerations for adapting or lifting restrictions on food, milk and drinking
water

Restrictions on food, milk and drinking water that are imposed as a precaution in the
emergency response phase on the basis of estimates (e.g. on the basis of EALs or OIL3 of
GSG-2 [9] and thereafter adjusted on the basis of OIL5 and OIL6 of GSG-2 [9] or OIL7 of
Ref. [17]) are characterized in detail in the transition phase. The purpose is to identify food
production areas and foodstuffs that need to remain under restriction even in the longer term
and to identify those restrictions that can be lifted. OILs for restrictions of food, milk and
drinking water derived on the basis of sampling and analysis (i.e. OIL6 in GSG-2 [9]) need to
be used when considering whether to adapt or lift this protective action.
The implementation, adaptation or lifting of restrictions on the international trade of food,
milk and drinking water needs to take into account established national criteria (that, in turn,
take account of the guideline levels contained in Ref. [45]), while ensuring consistency with
GSR Part 7 [2] and GSR Part 3 [1].

103

Whenever consideration is given on adapting or lifting restrictions on food, milk and drinking
water, the impact any decision may have on the residual dose has to be determined, and
informed decisions have to be made in consideration of the reference level applicable to the
situation.
III.5. RELOCATION
II.1.1. Description and objectives
Relocation is the non-urgent removal or extended exclusion of people from an area to avoid
long term exposure from deposited radioactive material. Relocation is an early protective
action. It may be a substitution for the evacuation. Relocation is considered to be permanent
relocation if return is not foreseeable; otherwise it is temporary relocation [3].
Relocation is used to prevent or significantly reduce further exposures from all exposure
pathways (notably external exposure, inhalation of resuspended material and inadvertent
ingestion) from radioactive material deposited on the ground and other surfaces, including
indoor contamination.
II.1.2. Applicability domain and strengths
Decisions on relocation are less urgent compared to evacuation. Relocation is considered
once radioactive material is deposited on the ground and the release is over. It is taken based
on results of the radiation monitoring, with account taken of what projected and residual
doses might be in future.
As relocation is not an urgent action, more time is available (in comparison to evacuation) to
prepare and implement this protective action, allowing households enough time to prepare
and implement the action. The collateral risks associated with relocation are also relatively
small compared with those for evacuation.
With relocation, better living conditions are provided to those leaving their homes. Namely,
while during the rapid evacuation people may be evacuation to a stadium and other large
areas, during relocation people are to be located in housing providing for normal living
conditions and access to necessary services according to their needs. Relocation is often
considered as a follow-on action after evacuation or sheltering. It may also be envisaged for
populations in areas where no protective actions were early in the emergency response but
where environmental radiation monitoring results show high depositions later on.
The period of relocation allows for the dose rate to fall either naturally due to weathering or
physical decay or due to decontamination measures. Decontamination activities performed at
the territories from which people were relocated, also could be used to allow quicker return of
the relocated population.
II.1.3. Weaknesses and limitations
The cost of relocation can be particularly high, especially if it is implemented for a prolonged
period (months or years). A precondition for relocation is the availability of accommodation,
with normal living conditions, of various types including:
− Existing infrastructure (e.g. hostels/hotels, serviced apartments, short and long term
lets, caravans and mobile homes); or
− New infrastructure such as prefabricated houses, portable cabins.

104

The choice between these options is likely to be primarily governed by many factors,
including the number of people to be resettled and the expected duration of relocation.
Relocation is expected to have a significant impact on the local economy, on individuals as
well as on whole communities, which may lead to mental health and psychological problems
and social issues. Concerns are likely to include: (a) stigma towards resettled population and
businesses; (b) loss of economic activity for businesses in the area; (c) loss of homes,
properties and workplaces; (d) anxiety for the security of premises left unoccupied; (e) loss of
self-esteem and depression; and (f) weakened resilience within community. Taking account
of such issues needs careful planning and resourcing to provide for the wellbeing of those
resettled.
Inhabitants in areas where people may be relocated can also find it difficult to accept large
numbers of newcomers. This may cause social exclusion of and stigma towards the relocated
population. Possible population conflicts in the relocated area between the local and
displaced populations may necessitate investment in social support and security management.
Access to temporarily or permanently evacuated areas needs to be controlled to protect
people and to avoid robbery. Measures may also need to be taken to prevent further
degradation, for example to assure the upkeep of woodlands or the maintenance of firebreaks,
especially in areas subject to frequent wildfires. Re-entry arrangements need to be planned
and supervised. In order to facilitate return, decontamination work and environmental care
need to be undertaken with various activities aimed at restoring social and economic activity
in the area.
A distinction can be made between temporary relocation limited to short periods (up to few
months), with the possibility of people being allowed to return to original housing, and
permanent relocation, when return cannot be envisaged within one year after they have been
relocated. Reactions to return are likely to differ in these two cases; during a prolonged
absence, new social relationships are created, and they may replace ties to the area of origin
and, thus, render the return being stressful again.
II.1.4. Duration
Relocation can last for weeks or months (temporary relocation) or indefinitely (permanent
relocation).
II.1.5. Timeframe for decision taking
Decisions on temporary or permanent relocation generally take place during the early
response phase, often following the lifting of sheltering or evacuation, based on the results of
environmental radiation monitoring. Such decisions might also arise later, during the
transition phase, following more comprehensive mapping of the deposited radioactivity and
identification of areas of higher deposition (hotspots). To be effective, relocation as an early
protective action is expected to be taken within days up to a few weeks after the emergency
on-set. This allows for performing radiation monitoring of areas where higher deposition is
expected (e.g. based on modeling data taking account of actual weather conditions) and
decision to be made on the basis of the results obtained.

105

II.1.6. Decision making criteria
Generic criteria
Table II.2 (for effective dose in the first year and for equivalent dose to the fetus for the full
period of in utero development) in Appendix II to GSR Part 7 [2] provides the generic criteria
for relocation.
Operational criteria
Relocation is to be taken on the basis of OILs (using OIL2, see Table 8 of GSG-2 [9] for a
nuclear emergency and Ref. [38] for a radiological emergency) once radiation monitoring
results become available.
II.1.7. Considerations for implementation in response
Depending on the number of people to be relocated and the expected duration of relocation, a
suitable range of accommodation is necessary to be available within a reasonable time period.
The use of existing infrastructures (e.g. hostels, hotels, serviced apartments, short and long
term lets, caravans and mobile homes) may provide a temporary solution. The army, NonGovernmental Organizations (e.g. Red Cross, Red Crescent) and citizens may need to be
requested to provide equipment (tents, camping mattresses, blankets, kitchenware). In the
longer term, the creation of new infrastructure (prefabricated houses, portable cabins) may be
more appropriate.
Arrangements need to be made for relocated families to be registered, transported and offered
financial, medical and psychological support. Special groups of population (e.g. patients,
prisoners) also need specific considerations.
It is likely that populations that have not been sheltered, given ITB or evacuated during the
urgent response phase find it difficult to understand the need for relocation. Authorities need
to explain and justify such decisions, for example arising from unexpected deposition
hotspots identified during deposition mapping process in the transition phase.
Relocation cannot be implemented without access control and surveillance of the areas from
which people have been relocated. Entrance of restoration workers and duly authorized
people need to be controlled, with measurement of contamination and decontamination, if
needed. Maintenance and decontamination activities are necessary in the relocated areas in
order to allow a future return. Even if a return is not possible, minimal maintenance could be
necessary, for example to prevent shrub and forest fires.
The authorities need to establish plans to create, as soon as possible, the conditions for
normal social and economic life in villages, towns or new settlements for both the population
in place and the newcomers. Transparent and regularly updated information, as well as social
and psychological support help to maintain the morale of the relocated population.
II.1.8. Considerations for preparedness
Considerations for preparedness are similar to those for evacuation. In addition, planning has
to be made such that allows hotspots to be timely identified and located, so that relocation
can be timely implemented. Locations or accommodation for temporary relocation need to be
identified and the necessary agreements and conventions need to be established. This aims at
their timely availability once needed. The availability of special needs for specific groups of
population (e.g. patients, prisoners) also warrants considerations.
106

II.1.9. Considerations for adapting or lifting relocation
If people are allowed to return to an area, their well-being is not endangered and it is possible
for them to carry out their routine social and economic activities in line with considerations
for evacuation. However, limited restrictions on normal living habits may still need to be
observed and might possibly extend into the longer term. The following considerations are
necessary when deciding on lifting relocation (see GSG-11 [8]):
- In an area where the radiation monitoring results indicate that the projected doses do
not exceed the generic criteria for relocation (i.e. the measurement results do not exceed
OIL2 of GSG-2 [9]), relocation might be lifted if no or only limited restrictions (e.g.
restrictions on locally produced food or limited access to certain recreational areas)
continue to be necessary for those people living normally in the area. In addition, the
following preconditions need to be also fulfilled:
o Infrastructure and public services are in place (e.g. public transportation, shops and
markets, schools, nurseries, health care facilities, police and firefighting services,
water services, sanitation, energy supplies, telecommunication networks);
o Clear instructions and advice on the restrictions still in place and the recommended
changes to behaviours and habits, including land use, have been provided to those
returning;
o Public support centre(s) and informational material (e.g. leaflets, posters) for public
reassurance and psychosocial support are available to those returning;
o A strategy has been established for the restoration of workplaces and for the
provision of social support; and
o Information on the likely evolution of the exposure situation and the associated
health hazards has been provided to those returning.
- In an area where the radiation monitoring results indicate that the projected doses do
not exceed the generic criteria for relocation (i.e. the measurement results do not exceed
OIL2 of GSG-2 [9]), but limited restrictions are not sufficient for the protection of the
people returning to live normally in the area, or the abovementioned preconditions are
not fulfilled, relocation need not to be lifted until this area can be managed as an
existing exposure situation, after fulfilment of the prerequisites in Section 3 of GSG-11
[8] and of the abovementioned preconditions. OIL for enabling the transition from an
emergency exposure situation to an existing exposure situation needs to be considered
in this case as an operational criterion to trigger discussion on lifting the evacuation
(see GSG-11 [8]). Example OILT for a nuclear emergency at an LWR is given in the
Appendix to GSG-11 [8]. OILT for a radiological emergency is given in Ref. [38].
The impact the lifting of evacuation might have on the residual doses needs also to be
assessed for informed decision making.
If return is not possible within a reasonable period (few months) for radiological or other
reasons (social, economic, infrastructure), or if people are not willing to return, temporary
relocation needs to be replaced by permanent relocation. This needs to be accompanied by
transparent information on the rationale and the conditions and once consultation took place,
allowing for the opinion of interested parties to be factored in in the decision making.

107

III.6. RESTRICTIONS ON NON-FOOD COMMODITIES
III.6.1.

Description and objectives

Restrictions on non-food commodities relate to the actions taken to protect non-food
commodities from getting contaminated in a nuclear or radiological emergency as well as to
the actions taken to protect individuals from use of non-food commodities that are potentially
or actually contaminated in the emergency.
The term ‘non-food commodities’ is broad and encompasses vehicles, cargoes, various items
for use (such as plates, toys or cutleries) and any item intended for public use that is not a
food but may get contaminated in an emergency.
The end goal of taking this action is to prevent or reduce both the external and internal
exposure (through inadvertent ingestion primarily) caused by the use of potentially or
actually contaminated non-food commodities.
III.6.2.

Applicability domain and strengths

Decisions on non-food commodities’ restrictions might need to be made as early as in the
urgent response phase as well as during the early response phase. These restrictions can be
lifted during the early response phase (e.g. radiation monitoring may show that precautionary
restrictions taken during the urgent response phase are not needed anymore) or during the
transition phase.
Restrictions on non-food commodities relate to only non-essential use. Restricting essential
commodities (e.g. emergency vehicle transporting a patient) could result in more harm than
good; therefore, essential commodities are to be restricted only if alternatives are available.
Long term impact is not expected in this case in comparison to the restrictions on food, milk
and drinking water.
Once preparations are made (which include identifying what commodities might be
contaminated in an emergency and may require restriction on their use, sale and distribution),
it is relatively easy to impose restrictions on non-food commodities. As the primary concern
is surface contamination, decontamination can be used as a means to clean the commodities
and put them in use again.
III.6.3.

Weaknesses and limitations

If applied on a large scale and for a long time, this represents a disruptive protective action
for the consumer, the producer and the industry/economy. However, based on past
experience, it is not expected that a nuclear or radiological emergency would cause
radioactive contamination of non-food commodities of that extent. Thus, major economic
impact is not to be anticipated. Goods which may get contaminated can be decontaminated
relatively easy and placed on market or put in use once radiation monitoring has confirmed
their suitability to do so. Need for uncontaminated substitutes may be appropriate in some
cases but this is expected to be only on an exceptional basis, taking account of the type of
commodity and its use.
As surface contamination is of primary concern, radioactive waste can be expected to be
produced as a result of the decontamination efforts. In some cases, fixed contamination may
render a commodity as unsafe to use and it needs to be managed as a radioactive waste.

108

Information and communication are essential in identifying potentially or actually
contaminated commodities and to support effectiveness of imposed restrictions.
III.6.4.

Duration

Restrictions on non-food commodities need to be initiated as soon as in the urgent response
phase as a precaution. These restrictions could then be adapted during the early and transition
phase, once radiation monitoring results become available.
III.6.5.

Timeframe for decision taking

To be most effective, decisions to protect relevant commodities from getting contaminated in
a nuclear or radiological emergency need to be made before or shortly after the release. Such
restrictions are precautionary. The restrictions could then be adjusted as radiation monitoring
is deployed and results are obtained. Namely, once detailed characterization is performed
(later in the emergency response), it is necessary to identify where and for what commodities’
restrictions are either justified or they can be lifted.
III.6.6.

Decision making criteria

Generic criteria
The generic criteria for restrictions on non-food commodities are given in Tables II.2, II.3,
II.4 and II.5 of Appendix II to GSR Part 7 [2] as follows:
 Effective dose/Equivalent dose to the fetus and embryo of 100 mSv in the first seven
days and 100 mSv in the first year/during the full period of in-utero development, all
exposure pathways considered, to be used for implementing restrictions on non-food
commodities as either urgent or early protective action before radiation monitoring can
be performed and usually as a precaution due to limited information available at the
time.
 Effective dose/Equivalent dose to the fetus and embryo of 10 mSv in the first
year/during the full period of in-utero development, only relevant exposure pathways
considered associated with the use of the commodity (external exposure and inadvertent
ingestion, as discussed above), to be used once radiation monitoring is performed to
provide a basis for discontinuing restrictions imposed as a precaution earlier in the
response.
 Effective dose/Equivalent dose to the fetus and embryo of 1 mSv in the first
year/during the full period of in-utero development, only relevant exposure pathways
considered associated with the use of the commodity (external exposure and inadvertent
ingestion, as discussed above), to be used once radiation monitoring is performed to
provide a basis for imposing restrictions on the international trade of non-food
commodities.
Operational criteria
To be most effective, decisions to protect relevant commodities from getting contaminated in
a nuclear or radiological emergency need to be made on the basis of the prevailing conditions
at the facility (i.e. EALs or upon declaration of the appropriate emergency class).
Additionally, precautionary restrictions on non-food commodities may need to be done in

109

addition to those taken on the basis of EALs (before sampling and analysis can be performed)
on the basis of simple radiation monitoring results using OIL3 [9].
Once sampling and analysis are performed, OILC (see GSG-11 [8]) needs to be used to
identify where and for what commodities’ restrictions are either justified to remain in place or
can be lifted. The methodology for deriving such specific OILs for commodities is provided
in GSG-11 [8]. OILC for a radiological emergency is given in Ref. [38].
III.6.7.

Considerations for implementation in response

Early in the response, every effort has to be made to prevent relevant commodities from
getting contaminated. It may be challenging for decision makers to see the importance of
such precautionary measures before the release has started, patterns of deposition are known
and/or radiation monitoring results are available, but failing to do so may result in needs for
managing large amounts of potentially contaminated goods.
Extensive radiation monitoring may need to be deployed in releasing the precautionary
actions and deciding what commodities are safe for use. Further measures on how to deal
with contaminated commodities need to be considered, including prioritizing the
decontamination of the contaminated items. Certification may be needed as a measure to
reassure the public in the safety of commodities from affected areas. Further then the
certification, considerations also need to be in place to address possible unwarranted actions,
such as rejection of an item or commodity coming from the affected areas, so that the
economic impact can be mitigated.
In general, providing advice and information, as well as radiation monitoring for reassurance
and support to the public for self-help actions, may be helpful and relatively inexpensive.
III.6.8.

Considerations for preparedness

It is important that authorities, together with all concerned and interested parties (e.g.
producers’ unions, food industry), develop the approach for ensuring safety of commodities
as part of the protection strategy. As part of this work, authorities need to identify what
commodities might get contaminated at levels requiring restrictions, what types of
commodities need to be replaced while restrictions are in place, the compensation of
producers and the decontamination means and responsibilities. Options for the management
of any waste generated also need to be identified in planning.
A good information and communication system for the public, the producers and the
associated professional organizations, and an effective consultation mechanism with all the
concerned parties are essential. Effective consultation during the development of the
approach for ensuring safety of commodities helps in ensuring feasibility of its
implementation in an emergency. This is of particular importance not only in relation to
efficient implementation of the agreed actions during the response, but also to adapting and
lifting the restrictions on non-food commodities. Namely, any changes in the restrictions
imposed earlier in the response would be impacted by the acceptance of the public, industry
and retailers or, as appropriate, other States.
III.6.9.

Considerations for adapting or lifting restrictions on non-food commodities

Decisions on the adaptation or lifting of restrictions on non-food commodities implemented
during the emergency response phase as a precaution or based on estimates (e.g. on the basis
of EALs or OIL3 of GSG-2 [9]) have to be based on comprehensive information and actual
110

radiation monitoring results. The purpose is to identify non-food commodities that are
justified to remain under restriction and to identify those restrictions that can be lifted.
Abovementioned OILs for non-food commodities to be used on the basis of results of
sampling and analysis (using OILC as discussed in Section III.6.6) have to be used when
considering whether to adapt or lift this protective action.
The implementation, adaptation or lifting of restrictions on the international trade of non-food
commodities needs to be based on established OILC, taking into account the abovementioned
criteria for international trade.
Whenever consideration is given on adapting or lifting restrictions on non-food commodities,
the impact any decision may have on the residual dose needs to be determined and informed
decisions need to be made in consideration of the reference level applicable to the situation.
III.7. CONTAMINATION CONTROL (PEOPLE, VEHICLES, EQUIPMENT AND
OTHER ITEMS)
III.7.1. Description and objectives
Contamination control relates to various actions and measures taken to prevent spreading of
contamination from an affected area in a nuclear or radiological emergency. These include
measures taken to ensure control is in place on what enters in and exits from the affected area
(access control), radiation monitoring of people, vehicles, equipment and other items leaving
the affected area and their decontamination, when appropriate.
Access control involves setting up barriers to an affected area and maintaining them to ensure
that people and vehicles including related items do not enter or exit the area unless authorized
to do so, they are monitored and, where necessary, decontaminated. Such controls not only
help preventing the contamination is spread outside the restricted areas, but help ensuring
systematic control of exposures incurred by people (such as restoration workers, farmers
caring for what was left behind) spending time in restricted area.
Decontamination is the complete or partial removal of contamination by a deliberate
physical, chemical or biological process [3]. It includes a wide range of processes for
removing contamination from people, equipment and buildings, but to exclude the removal of
radionuclides from within the human body or the removal of radionuclides by natural
weathering or migration processes, which are not considered to be decontamination. Personal
decontamination processes may range from simply changing clothes, washing or showering
to assisted decontamination, performed by trained personnel in special installations, possibly
under medical supervision.
Access control, radiation monitoring and decontamination, where necessary, can also play a
key role in public reassurance, especially to those resettled as well as for people who receive
them.
III.7.2. Applicability domain and strengths
Actions and measures for contamination control are applicable to the emergency response
phase as well as to the transition phase. Access control may still be warranted in the longer
term for areas delineated as inappropriate to allow inhabitation and to resume social and
economic activity. Actions and measures for contamination control needs to be implemented
together with decisions on sheltering, evacuation or relocation and in the area where these
actions are implemented.
111

Contamination control through radiation monitoring (including skin monitoring and thyroid
monitoring, as appropriate) and personal decontamination are of particular importance for the
emergency response phase, particularly for the population evacuated from the affected area
after a radioactive release has started, undergoing relocation or persons who may have been
in contact with an unsealed radioactive source. They may also be considered after sheltering
during a release and for people entering or exiting the restricted areas. In principle, such
actions are not necessary for people evacuated as a precaution, before any release occurs,
unless there is a possibility that they were exposed to the radioactive plume during their
travel.
Contamination control through radiation monitoring and decontamination applies to
emergency workers and helpers who are working in restricted access areas as well as for any
vehicles (e.g. ambulance, heavy machinery involved in restoration works, police patrol cars),
equipment and other items leaving the restricted areas (such as evidence or personal
belongings, valuables) and is applied as they leave the area through checkpoints. Any
restrictions imposed on vehicles, equipment and other items need to consider whether they
are essential or not, and decontamination might need to be considered at times.
These measures are effective in providing public reassurance which is important for public
well-being. When limited to changing clothes and taking a domestic shower, personal
decontamination is easy to implement and can be performed for large populations.
Restricting and controlling the access from outside to a sheltered zone prevent unnecessary
exposure while contributing, in the emergency response phase, to freeing the roads of traffic
and, hence, facilitating the movement and actions of emergency workers and helpers.
Restricting and controlling the access from outside to an evacuated zone also prevent
unnecessary exposure and secure the evacuated area against robbery and plundering.
III.7.3. Weaknesses and limitations
In case of a severe nuclear emergency, limitations on the radiation monitoring equipment,
trained personnel and specific decontamination installations, place limitations on the number
of people who can be checked and decontaminated, when needed, in due time. Triage criteria
are of paramount importance to ensure that those who need decontamination are identified as
a priority.
Decontamination of water, material and personal clothing and belongings might generate
large amounts of radioactive waste. There may also be problems persuading people to dispose
of personal belongings with high monetary or sentimental value and these may need to be
decontaminated instead.
Access control may involve the mobilization of a significant number of police personnel,
possibly with the support of army personnel. Depending on the area, controlling access may
be difficult, therefore means of dealing with unauthorized access into the restricted areas need
to be established. Some type of patrol within the restricted areas needs to be organized;
however, implementation of this action is associated with radiation exposure to personnel
who performs the patrol. Remote control systems and methods are preferable but may take
some time to put in place.
Recording access times to restricted areas, radiation monitoring contamination levels at exit,
carrying out decontamination, when appropriate, and recording exposure levels need
significant resources, even if located at a limited number of checkpoints.

112

III.7.4. Duration
Contamination control needs to be put in place as early as in the urgent response phase and
mostly maintained during the emergency response phase. Some aspects of contamination
control need to be maintained for a longer period during the transition phase as well as after
the emergency is terminated, for example for workers and helpers involved in restoration
activities in restricted access areas and for (duly authorized) people re-entering restricted
areas.
Access control needs to be put in place once areas have been evacuated and needs to be
maintained until return or free access is authorized. Access control to highly contaminated
areas are likely to be maintained in the existing exposure situation, e.g. for workers involved
in the rehabilitation works.
III.7.5. Timeframe for decision taking
Decisions on performing radiation monitoring and, as appropriate, decontamination of
populations need to be considered together with the decision on evacuation and later with the
decision on relocation, in order to provide sufficient time to prepare the necessary
infrastructure and to set up the necessary equipment. Radiation monitoring of the skin is only
effective over the first few days. After a few days, most of the radioactive materials are
removed from the skin by natural processes [17].
Decision on access control needs to be made in parallel with the decisions on evacuation,
sheltering and relocation, so that adequate safety and security measures are in place for the
areas where these protective actions are taken. The decisions can be directly associated with
any decision for activating the protection strategy within the pre-planned zones or the inner
cordoned off areas.
Thus, the timeframe for decision making on taking the measures and actions for
contamination control corresponds to the timeframe for effective decision making on
sheltering, evacuation and relocation.
III.7.6. Decision making criteria
Generic criteria
As the measures and actions for ensuring contamination control are associated with the
decisions to implement sheltering, evacuation and relocation, the generic criteria for taking
these actions for public protection, as discussed earlier in this Appendix, are the criteria to
trigger contamination control as well.
Restrictions on the use of non-essential vehicles, equipment and other items leaving the
affected area have to be considered on the basis of criteria contained in Table II.4 of
Appendix II to GSR Part 7 [2], in order to reduce the risk of stochastic effects.
Operational criteria
As the measures and actions for ensuring contamination control are associated with the
decisions to implement sheltering, evacuation and relocation, the operational criteria for
taking these actions (i.e. EALs, OIL1, OIL2 given in GSG-2 [9]) have to be used as
operational criteria to trigger the need for radiation monitoring and access control.

113

The decision to implement personal decontamination has to be based on OIL4 [9, 17]. When
OIL4 is not exceeded, recommendation on changing clothes and showering at home is
sufficient.
The decision to restrict the use of vehicles, equipment and other items and to perform their
decontamination, if necessary, needs to be judged on the basis of OILs developed on the
abovementioned generic criteria, applying a methodology similarly as the one elaborated for
other OILs in Refs [17, 38].
III.7.7. Considerations for implementation in response
As soon as an emergency is declared and evacuation or relocation is ordered, the authorities
need to activate the measure for contamination control and put in place the personal
decontamination infrastructure. All necessary personnel (e.g. civil protection, fire brigades,
police, medical and psychological support teams) needs to be mobilized in ensuring that
control is in place. All necessary information and materials (e.g. information leaflets,
registration forms, spare clothes), radiation monitoring equipment and decontamination
material need to be conveyed to the respective centres and deployed. The personnel in charge
needs to be considered as emergency workers and protected accordingly.
The risk to health from skin contamination is small and, therefore, radiation monitoring or
decontamination of the skin does not warrant delaying or interfering with more important
response actions (e.g. sheltering, evacuation, treatment of injured individuals or patients)
[17].
The authorities need to differentiate priority groups, requiring assisted decontamination
performed by trained personnel in special installations, from other groups for whom selfdecontamination is sufficient. The detailed approach depends on the availability of specific
detection devices, trained personnel, special decontamination installations, and on the number
of people of concern and their ability to care for themselves. For those individuals for whom
OIL4 is exceeded, dose from all exposure pathways needs to be assessed to identify whether
there is a need for medical follow-up. However, as this could not be done early in the
response due to lack of information and other priorities, such individuals and measurement
data have to be registered and their records kept for retrieving later on.
The organization of the contamination control and decontamination has to consider specific
needs of babies and children, disabled persons, prisoners, as well as for religious or cultural
specifics. Radiation monitoring for internal contamination might be required to complement
the external contamination control, especially for people still exhibiting high contamination
levels after repeated external decontamination processes. For these people, internal exposure
resulting from inhalation or ingestion may be more significant than external exposure.
The authorities need to ensure that transparent information, advice, medical and
psychological support is provided and that the results of the contamination measurements, the
decontamination process used, and its efficiency are registered for later follow-up, if
necessary.
Plastic bags need to be provided for individual clothes and personal belongings together with
adequate identification stickers. These bags might be measured at a later date, if necessary.
Measurements of activity levels on the clothes might also be necessary for dose
reconstruction, for individuals who have undergone self-decontamination (domestic shower),
or to decide whether the clothing may be returned after washing or if it needs to be disposed
of as radioactive waste.
114

Arrangements for waste management and treatment of decontamination water and
contaminated clothes and belongings also need to be activated.
Authorities need to consider access restrictions where evacuation, relocation or sheltering are
in force. If these protective actions are implemented, checkpoints need to be installed to
monitor and control those authorized to access a restricted area. Lists stating who (e.g.
emergency services, medical doctors, rehabilitation workers), when and for what purpose
people may be allowed access (e.g. collect belongings, documents, medicine, to check on the
security of property or to attend to the needs of pets and livestock) need to be defined at the
preparedness stage. Duly authorized person needs to be registered at entry, informed about
the conditions imposed by the authorities (personal protective equipment, dosimetry),
monitored for contamination (and decontaminated if necessary) and registered (access times
and exposure) on exit.
Checkpoints are able to provide for performing radiation monitoring and, if needed,
decontamination of vehicles, equipment and other items leaving the restricted area. In case
contamination is determined, decisions need to be made where and how to handle these
items.
The controllers at checkpoints need to be informed about the risk, precautions and protective
equipment necessary for their role.
In case of an emergency involving the release of radioiodine, personal radiation monitoring
needs to consider thyroid monitoring. The monitoring aims at identifying individuals whose
intake of radioiodine is such that OIL8 of Ref. [17] is exceeded. In such cases, individuals
need to be registered and measuring results noted, so that dose can be estimated so as to
identify need for subjecting the individual to further medical examination and medical
follow-up.
III.7.8. Considerations for preparedness
The authorities need to identify suitable locations and infrastructure for contamination control
and decontamination based on generic expectations; operational guidelines describing how to
adapt the infrastructure for its purpose, when activated in an emergency, to cope with the
different functions of such a centre (e.g. welcome, information, registration, medical and
psychological support, re-orientation, control, decontamination, catering, temporary
accommodation) also need to be provided.
The authorities need to establish a stock of clean clothes and plastic bags with identification
codes for contaminated clothes. They also need to provide adequate information and training
in preparedness to the pre-identified workers (army, civil protection, fire brigades) and, just
in time, to helpers (e.g. Red Cross, Red Crescent, other non-governmental organizations) to
welcome, inform, help those arriving at control and decontamination centres.
The authorities need to define a triage procedure to implement radiation monitoring and
decontamination in case of an emergency potentially affecting many people. This procedure
needs to differentiate between priority groups: those who will be directed towards a
contamination control and assisted decontamination, and those who will take care for
themselves, by changing clothes and having a domestic shower. Information leaflets
explaining both options need to be prepared in advance.
A procedure to manage the storage, radiation monitoring, return or disposal of individual
bags containing clothing and the necessary facilities for cleaning and waste management
needs to be prepared.
115

The police need to develop a plan to rapidly cordon off the restricted access area and to be
able to gather and deploy the necessary tools and means. Some of these tools (e.g. light panel,
screens) can be installed at the most critical locations at the preparedness stage. The
necessary equipment to cordoned restricted access areas needs to be prepared for rapid
deployment.
Arrangements need to be made on how to monitor and decide on safety of various items that
need to leave the restricted area, the procedures to follow when their further use warrant
decontamination and means to do so.
Individual protective equipment and radiation monitoring instruments need to be available
and periodically checked; the involved personnel need to be trained to use this equipment.
Leaflets explaining the rules and safety instructions need to be prepared for distribution to
those entering the restricted access areas in advance.
III.7.9. Considerations for adapting or lifting contamination control
Access control is lifted in parallel with the decisions for reopening areas for inhabitation and
for resuming normal social and economic activity, i.e. with the decisions to lift evacuation or
relocation. Thus, any such decision needs to consider OILT [8, 38] and the impacts on the
level of residual doses.
However, it is to be expected that certain areas remain closed as inappropriate for
inhabitation and resumption of normal social and economic activity in the longer term and,
thus, they would be delineated. For such delineated areas, access control remains in place.
This means that checkpoints for controlling the entrance and exit, as well as arrangements for
radiation monitoring and registering people and items entering and exiting the delineated
area, need to remain in place in the longer term, too. This covers the duly authorized persons,
as well as workers and helpers engaged in restoration work in the restricted areas, and
associated vehicles, equipment and other items.
Contamination control through radiation monitoring and decontamination of the population is
maintained until the relevant population has been checked or evidence has been obtained that
external contamination does not significantly contribute to the radiation exposure. For
example, there are no continuing occurrence of individuals with levels of radioactive
contamination of skin exceeding OIL4 [9, 17, 38].
III.8. PREVENTION OF INADVERTENT INGESTION
III.8.1. Description and objectives
Prevention of inadvertent ingestion relates to advice being given not to drink, eat or smoke
and to keep hands away from the mouth until hands are washed and not to play on the ground
or do other activities that could result in the creation of dust that could be ingested or inhaled.
Although simple action following general hygiene rules, the advice aims at reducing
ingestion and inhalation of released or resuspended radioactive material.
III.8.2. Applicability domain and strengths
Actions to prevent inadvertent ingestion and inhalation (e.g. washing hands and limitations
on playing on the ground or on working in gardens) have to be advised as early as during the
urgent response phase. However, as a protective action, advice on preventing inadvertent
ingestion and the inhalation of resuspended material also needs to be given in the transition
116

phase on the basis of actual conditions, to reduce the residual dose among those returning to
live in an affected area once evacuation or relocation is lifted.
The prevention of inadvertent ingestion can be advised within predetermined areas (such as
the EPD or the inner cordoned off areas). It is equally applicable to the actually or potentially
affected population as well as to emergency workers and helpers in an emergency.
The advice is simple and follows mainly general hygiene rules, making it easy to implement
and at no cost. In addition, it is very effective in reducing ingestion of released radioactive
material or inhalation of resuspended radioactive material.
III.8.3. Weaknesses and limitations
Population may find it challenging and difficult to follow some of the advice for prevention
of inadvertent ingestion (such as limitations on playing on the ground or on working in the
gardens), despite evacuation or relocation has been lifted and the return to their homes
advised.
III.8.4. Duration
Prevention of inadvertent ingestion could be advised during the emergency response phase
(for people sheltered or undergoing evacuation or preparing for relocation or emergency
workers in the affected areas) as well as during the transition phase (e.g. for people returning
in an areas with limited restrictions still in place and emergency workers and helpers
performing some tasks within the affected areas). The advice may extend even in longer term,
e.g. in delineated areas to which access has been granted to duly authorized persons and to
workers and helpers involved in restoration works.
III.8.5. Timeframe for decision taking
Prevention of inadvertent ingestion is not a standalone action. It needs to be advised as early
as possible before or shortly after the release together with decisions made for sheltering or
evacuation. It may also be advised within predetermined areas (such as EPD) during the
urgent response phase or together with decisions to initiate relocation during the early
response phase. Thus, the timeframe for decision on prevention of inadvertent ingestion, as
an urgent protective action, is the same as the timeframe for decision on sheltering and
evacuation.
III.8.6. Decision making criteria
Generic criteria
Prevention of inadvertent ingestion always needs to be advised when the generic criteria
specified in Tables II.1 (for acute exposures) and II.2 (for exposures in the first seven days
and the first year/or the full period of in-utero development) have been exceeded. These
correspond to the criteria for taking evacuation, sheltering and relocation discussed earlier in
this Appendix.
Operational criteria
To be most effective, advice to help reducing inadvertent ingestion of deposited radioactive
material and inhalation of resuspended radioactive material need to be given before or shortly
after the release. To do so, EALs or observables (see GSG-2 [9]) need to be used. Upon
declaration of the emergency, advice to help reducing inadvertent ingestion of deposited
radioactive material and inhalation of resuspended radioactive material may be automatically
117

advices within EPD or the inner cordoned off area. Advice to help reducing inadvertent
ingestion of deposited radioactive material and inhalation of resuspended radioactive material
need also to be given when evacuation or relocation are ordered on the basis of OILs
discussed earlier in this Appendix.
III.8.7. Considerations for implementation in response
As easy to implement and cannot cause any harm but can provide for public reassurance,
advice for following normal hygiene rules and those to prevent inadvertent ingestion and
inhalation need to be given together with almost all public protective actions within the
protection strategy. Combining such advice with other possible self-actions is useful.
Additional information and clarity needs to be provided to populations to explain the
necessity to follow some of the advice for prevention of inadvertent ingestion (such as
limitations on playing on the ground or on working in the gardens), despite evacuation or
relocation has been lifted and the return to their homes advised.
III.8.8. Considerations for preparedness
The advice needs to be part of the protection strategy established at the preparedness stage
and reflected in various operational arrangements (such as procedures for decision makers on
public protective actions to recommend) including in leaflets and other information materials
intended for populations living in emergency planning zones.
III.8.9. Considerations for adapting or lifting prevention of inadvertent ingestion and of
inhalation
Actions to prevent inadvertent ingestion and inhalation (e.g. washing hands and limitations
on playing on the ground or on working in gardens) could be advised during the urgent
response phase. However, as a protective action, advice on preventing inadvertent ingestion
and the inhalation of resuspended material also needs to be given in the transition phase on
the basis of actual conditions, to reduce the residual dose among those returning to live in an
affected area once evacuation or relocation is lifted (see GSG-11 [8]). Lifting any limitations
on playing on the ground or on working in gardens can take place after their impact on the
residual dose has been estimated, with account taken on the acceptable reference level to
enable the transition to an existing exposure situation (based on GSG-11 [8], approaching
residual effective dose of 20 mSv in the first year). Considerations to lift any such limitations
can be initiated on the basis of OILT in line with GSG-11 [8] and Ref. [38].

118

REFERENCES
[1]

EUROPEAN COMMISSION, FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF
THE UNITED NATIONS, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY
AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Radiation
Protection and Safety of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety Standards, IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 3, IAEA, Vienna (2014).

[2]

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL CIVIL
AVIATION ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, INTERPOL, OECD NUCLEAR
ENERGY
AGENCY,
PAN
AMERICAN
HEALTH
ORGANIZATION,
PREPARATORY COMMISSION FOR THE COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR-TESTBAN TREATY ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT
PROGRAMME, UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF
HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD
METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION, Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or
Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 7, IAEA,
Vienna (2015).

[3]

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, IAEA Safety Glossary:
Terminology Used in Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection, 2018 Edition, IAEA,
Vienna (2019).

[4]

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, International Basic Safety
Standards for Protection against Ionizing Radiation and for the Safety of Radiation
Sources (CD-ROM Edition, 2003), Safety Series No. 115/CD, IAEA, Vienna.

[5]

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Preparedness and Response for a
Nuclear or Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-R-2, IAEA,
Vienna (2002).

[6]

INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Recommendations of the ICRP, Publication 60, Pergamon Press, Oxford (1991).

[7]

INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Recommendations of the ICRP, Publication 63, Elsevier, Oxford (1993).

[8]

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL CIVIL
AVIATION
ORGANIZATION,
INTERNATIONAL
LABOUR
OFFICE,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, INTERPOL, OECD NUCLEAR
ENERGY AGENCY, UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF
HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD
METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION, Arrangements for the Termination of a
Nuclear or Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSG-11,
IAEA, Vienna (2018).

[9]

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR
OFFICE, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION, Criteria for Use in Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or
119

Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSG-2, IAEA, Vienna
(2011).
[10] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Recommendations of the ICRP, Publication 103, Elsevier, Oxford (2008).
[11] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Convention on Early Notification
of a Nuclear Accident and Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident
or Radiological Emergency, Legal Series No. 14, IAEA, Vienna (1987).
[12] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Convention on Nuclear Safety,
Legal Series No. 16, IAEA, Vienna (1994).
[13] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, International health regulations (2005), Third
edition, WHO, Geneva (2016).
[14] INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION, ILO
Convention 1960 (No. 115) – C115, ILO, Geneva (1998).

Radiation

Protection

[15] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Safety Assessment for Facilities
and Activities, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 4 (Rev. 1), IAEA, Vienna
(2016).
[16] INTERNATIONAL
ATOMIC
ENERGY
AGENCY,
Nuclear
Security
Recommendations on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities
(INFCIRC/225/Revision 5), IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13, IAEA, Vienna
(2011).
[17] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Operational Intervention Levels
for Reactor Emergencies and Methodology for Their Derivation, EPR-NPP-OILs 2017,
IAEA, Vienna (2017.
[18] INTERNATIONAL
ATOMIC
ENERGY
AGENCY,
Nuclear
Security
Recommendations on Radioactive Material and Associated Facilities, IAEA Nuclear
Security Series No. 14, IAEA, Vienna (2011).
[19] EUROPEAN POLICE OFFICE, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL POLICE ORGANIZATION–INTERPOL, UNITED NATIONS
INTERREGIONAL CRIME AND JUSTICE RESEARCH INSTITUTE, UNITED
NATIONS OFFICE ON DRUGS AND CRIME, WORLD CUSTOMS
ORGANIZATION, Nuclear Security Recommendations on Nuclear and Other
Radioactive Material out of Regulatory Control, IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 15,
IAEA, Vienna (2011).
[20] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dangerous Quantities of
Radioactive Material (D-Values), EPR-D-Values 2006, IAEA, Vienna (2006).
[21] NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION, Accident Source Terms for Light-Water
Nuclear Power Plants, Final Report, NUREG-1465, NRC, Washington, DC (1995).
[22] SANDIA NATIONAL LABORATORIES, Accident Source Terms for Light-Water
Nuclear Power Plants Using High-Burnup or MOX Fuel, SAND2011-0128,
Albuquerque, NM, and Livermore, CA (2011).
[23] NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION, State-of-the-Art Reactor Consequence
Analyses (SOARCA), Vol. 1 (Rev. 1): Peach Bottom Integrated Analyses, and Vol. 2
(Rev. 1): Surry Integrated Analyses, NUREG/CR-7110, NRC, Washington, DC (2013).
120

[24] US ATOMIC ENERGY COMMISSION, Theoretical Possibilities and Consequences
of Major Accidents in Large Nuclear Power Plants, U.S. Atomic Energy Commission
Report WASH-740, Washington, DC (1957).
[25] US NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION, Reactor Safety Study: An
Assessment of Accident Risks in U.S. Commercial Nuclear Power Plants, WASH-1400
(NUREG-75/014), Washington, DC (1975).
[26] RITCHIE, L.T., et al., Calculations of Reactor Accident Consequences, Version 2,
CRAC 2: Computer Code Users Guide, NRC Report NUREG/CR-2326, NTIS,
Springfield, VA (1983).
[27] NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION, Severe Accident Risks: An Assessment
for Five US Nuclear Power Plants, Final Summary Report, 3 vols, Rep. NUREG-1150,
Washington, DC (1990).
[28] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The Radiological Accident in
Goiânia, IAEA, Vienna (1988).
[29] OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY AGENCY, The Chernobyl Reactor Accident Source
Term, NEA/CSNI/R(95)24, OECD NEA, Paris (1995).
[30] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The International Chernobyl
Project, IAEA, Vienna (1991).
[31] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Environmental Consequences of
the Chernobyl Accident and their Remediation: Twenty Years of Experience, IAEA,
Vienna (2006).
[32] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The Fukushima Daiichi Accident,
Volumes 1-5, IAEA, Vienna (2015).
[33] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The Radiological Accident in
Cochabamba, IAEA, Vienna (2004).
[34] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The Radiological Accident in
Tammiku, IAEA, Vienna (1998).
[35] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The Radiological Accident in
Chilca, IAEA, Vienna (2018).
[36] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The Radiological Accident in
Samut Prakarn, IAEA, Vienna (2002).
[37] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, Assessing
Dose of the Representative Person for the Purpose of Radiation Protection of the Public
and the Optimisation of Radiological Protection: Broadening the Process, ICRP
Publication 101, Elsevier, Oxford (2006).
[38

]INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Operational Intervention Levels
for Radiological Emergencies, EPR-RAD-OILs, IAEA, Vienna (in preparation).

[39] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Actions to Protect the Public in an
Emergency due to Severe Conditions at a Light Water Reactor, EPR-NPP Public
Protective Actions 2013, IAEA, Vienna (2013).
[40] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR
OFFICE, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS
121

OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS, WORLD
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Arrangements for Preparedness for a Nuclear or
Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-G-2.1, IAEA, Vienna
(2007).
[41] UNITED NATIONS SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE ON THE EFFECTS OF ATOMIC
RADIATION, Sources, Effects and Risks of Ionizing Radiation: UNSCEAR 2012
Report to the General Assembly with Scientific Annexes, United Nations, New York
(2015).
[42] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Occupational Radiation
Protection, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSG-7, IAEA, Vienna (2018).
[43] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Application of the Commission’s Recommendations for the Protection of People in
Emergency Exposure Situations, ICRP Publication 109, Elsevier, Oxford (2008).
[44] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Iodine thyroid blocking: Guidelines for use in
planning and responding to radiological and nuclear emergencies, WHO, Geneva
(2017).
[45] JOINT
FAO/WHO
FOOD
STANDARDS
PROGRAMME,
CODEX
ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION, Codex General Standard for Contaminants and
Toxins in Food and Feed, Schedule 1 — Radionuclides, CODEX STAN 193-1995,
Codex Alimentarius Commission, Rome (2015).

122

ANNEX I
EXAMPLE PROTECTION STRATEGY FOR A NUCLEAR OR RADIOLOGICAL
EMERGENCY
This annex provides an example of a protection strategy for a nuclear or radiological
emergency. The example protection strategy has been developed using the outline given in
Appendix II and is intended to help States identify the relevant information to be given in a
strategy, as foreseen in this document, notwithstanding the fact that the level of information
and details to be given in the national protection strategy will be driven by the national
emergency preparedness and response framework.
The example protection strategy has been developed for a range of potential emergency
scenarios associated with facilities, activities, sources, acts and areas in the five EPCs, as
defined in [ ]. The potential emergency scenarios were grouped into the following three
groups on the basis of the commonalities in various elements of the protection strategy for the
emergency scenarios within a group and the differences among the different groups:
(1) Severe nuclear emergency (emergency class: General emergency) at facilities in EPCs
I and II or at a facility located across the border (EPC V), that is characterized by
extensive on-site and off-site consequences;
(2) Nuclear or radiological emergency (emergency class: Site area emergency or Facility
emergency) associated with facilities in EPCs I, II and III, that is characterized by onsite consequences within the site area or specific location within the facility;
(3) Radiological emergency (emergency class: Other nuclear or radiological emergency)
associated with activities and acts in EPC IV, that is characterized by on-site
consequences occurring at any location within the State.
Despite the fact that the emergency scenarios within a group share a common protection
strategy, the operational arrangements expected to be elaborated in various operational
documents, such as emergency plans and procedures, are likely to differ between the different
emergency scenarios within the same group.
The example protection strategy in this annex is based on IAEA Safety Standards Series
publications and associated technical guidance in the area of emergency preparedness and
response, and assumes that the hypothetical State has such facilities, activities and sources for
which various recommendations and numerical values of the IAEA guidance apply. Relevant
aspects of the example protection strategy that are expected to be given in the national
context are left out and marked ‘[…]’.
The terminology used in the example protection strategy follows that used by the IAEA
Safety Glossary [I‒1]. However, it is expected that the national protection strategy will use
terminology that is common for the State and does not necessarily follow that used in the
IAEA Safety Standards Series.

123

Protection Strategy of Country A
for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency

Approved by:
Date of approval:
Version:

124

The protection strategy has been agreed by the authorities* listed below. These authorities are
responsible for its proper implementation in their operational arrangements at the
preparedness stage as well as during an emergency response. The protection strategy has also
been distributed to these authorities who are responsible for its further dissemination among
their staff.
Organization:

*

Signature of responsible authority:

Date:

To be specified at the national level.

125

CONTENTS
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1. Background
1.2 Objective and scope
1.3 Target audience
1.4 Terms used in the strategy
2. UNDERLYING GOALS AND PRINCIPLES
2.1 Goals of emergency response
2.2 Radiation protection principles
2.3 Other guiding principles
3. PLANNING BASIS AND HAZARD ASSESSMENT
3.1 Planning basis
3.2 Hazard assessment
4. STRATEGY FOR REGAINING CONTROL AND MITIGATING CONSEQUENCES
ON THE SITE
5. PUBLIC PROTECTION STRATEGY
5.1 Description of emergency phases
5.2 Decision making criteria
5.3 Process for assessing the situation against decision making criteria and for making
the decisions
5.4 Process for adjusting and lifting of protective actions and other response actions
5.5 Protective actions and other response actions to be implemented
5.6 Consultation with the public and other interested parties
6. PROTECTION STRATEGY FOR EMERGENCY WORKERS AND HELPERS
6.1 Emergency workers and helpers
6.2 Dose restrictions for emergency workers and helpers
6.3 Processes for assessing the situation, decision making and adaptation
6.4 Protective actions and measures to be implemented
6.5 Communicating risks and doses to emergency workers and helpers
7. SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
7.1 Management
7.2 Radiation monitoring and assessment
7.3 Public communication
8. IMPLEMENTING
ARRANGEMENTS
APPENDICES
REFERENCES
ANNEXES

126

THE

PROTECTION

STRATEGY

IN

OPERATIONAL

1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 Background
Country A has been dedicated to a high level of emergency preparedness and response […].
In this context, it embarked on developing a protection strategy as required […] with the aim
to put, at one place, all relevant information that enables timely and efficient decision making
in an emergency response so that protective actions and other response actions can be taken
effectively in a nuclear or radiological emergency.
This protection strategy outlines the national approach to protect individuals (i.e. the public,
emergency workers and helpers in an emergency) in Country A in case of a nuclear and
radiological emergency, should it happen despite efforts made to prevent it. The protection
strategy has been developed with involvement of all concerned parties with role and
responsibilities in emergency preparedness and response at national, regional or local level.
The process of development was coordinated through […] and involved […].
Elements of this protection strategy have been initially developed during the [time period]
with […] and have been further strengthened since then, taking account of national and
international standards, guidance and good practices.
This protection strategy considers the feedback received through consultation with all
relevant parties that include […].
1.2 Objective and scope
The protection strategy elaborated in this document aims to provide common understanding
of how the public and other individuals are protected in a nuclear or radiological emergency,
the principles of radiation protection it applies and the goals the emergency response it aims
to achieve. It describes the common goals all concerned parties contribute to achieve when
undertaking their response roles, including the basis for making decisions in an emergency
response as well as the suite of protective actions and other response actions to be taken for
an effective response.
The protection strategy takes into account the existing EPR framework comprising of […],
lessons learned from past emergencies and exercises such as […] and international standards
such as […]. It complements following existing arrangements and documents: […]
The protection strategy applies for any nuclear or radiological emergency, irrespective of the
cause (i.e. safety and security related), associated with facilities, activities, areas and sources
within Country A and beyond borders falling in the five emergency preparedness categories
(EPCs) described in […] as following […].
Potential emergencies warranting emergency response actions for which the protection
strategy is developed have been derived from the hazard assessment as required in […].
Various potential emergency scenarios have been studied to identify commonalities and
differences in terms of the protection strategy applicable to them and then grouped into
specific groups so that each scenario within a group share a common protection strategy. The
three groups of potential emergency scenarios considered for the protection strategy are
described in Section 3.2. Although the protection strategy is focused on these three groups of
emergency scenarios, due to major commonalities in the strategy among the emergency
scenarios within a group and the differences between the groups, the operational
arrangements elaborated in various operational documents (such as plans and procedures)

127

may differ between the different emergency scenarios within the same group, despite the fact
that they share a common protection strategy.
The protection strategy covers the entire period from the emergency onset by the time the
emergency can be formally declared ended, i.e. it addresses the emergency response phase as
well as the transition phase.
The protection strategy does not cover:
- Aspects related to operational arrangements that constitute part of the respective plans,
procedures etc. such as emergency management system including the unified command
and control system, operator’s mitigatory actions, activation of emergency response,
medical response, warning the public and provision of information to the public,
requesting international assistance, analysis of the emergency and its response, staffing,
training and exercises etc.;
- Long term recovery within the framework of existing exposure situation.
1.3 Target audience
The target audience for this document are decision makers (emergency managers),
emergency planners (at the facility, local, regional and national level), emergency response
coordinators, qualified experts/radiation protection officers (radiological assessors, technical
advisers to decision makers) and relevant staff of different response organizations at all levels
with roles and responsibilities in preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological
emergency.
In addition, the protection strategy is open to the public and other interested parties.
1.4 Terms used in the strategy
Terms are used in this document as defined in […].
2. UNDERLYING GOALS AND PRINCIPLES
2.1 Goals of emergency response
Nuclear or radiological emergency can have a wide range of consequences and an effective
emergency response has to address them as a whole. Although the initial priority will be
focused on those efforts that aim to protect the public against the harmful health effects due
to radiation exposure, other consequences should also be timely addressed. Namely, nuclear
or radiological emergency can have adverse non-radiological consequences (economic, social
and psychological) that can overcome the radiological consequences and warrant adequate
response to ensure that they are minimized. Thus, during a nuclear or radiological emergency,
every effort will be made to achieve the following goals of emergency response, in
accordance with para. 3.2 of GSR Part 7 [I‒2]:





To regain control of the situation and to mitigate consequences;
To save lives;
To avoid or to minimize severe deterministic effects;
To render first aid, to provide critical medical treatment and to manage the treatment of
radiation injuries;
 To reduce the risk of stochastic effects;
 To keep the public informed and to maintain public trust;
 To mitigate, to the extent practicable, non-radiological consequences;
128

 To protect, to the extent practicable, property and the environment;
 To prepare, to the extent practicable, for the resumption of normal social and economic
activity.
Achieving these goals will help ensuring that no radiation induced health effects are to be
observed, on an individual basis or collectively, among the affected population, that nonradiological consequences are mitigated to the extent practicable and that all needed is done
to help resuming normal social and economic activity in the affected areas.
2.2 Radiation protection principles
The protection strategy was formulated with account taken of the main radiation protection
principles of justification and optimization of protection and safety as stipulated in […].
Thus, the strategy ensures that actions taken in a nuclear or radiological emergency do more
good than harm by outweighing the detriments associated with the actions being taken by the
net benefit from taking the actions and that doses are kept as low as reasonable.
In justifying and optimizing the protection strategy, a range of factors were considered that
go beyond the radiation protection considerations as following […]. The protection strategy
was justified and optimized through a process that involved […] and comprised of […].
Notwithstanding this, it is expected that justification and optimization will also be carried out
in the course of an emergency response, as information becomes available on the actual
conditions and impacts, and as the time to do so allows without jeopardizing the effectiveness
of the protection strategy.
2.3 Other guiding principles
The following principles guided the development of the protection strategy:
Resilience: The development of this strategy was driven by the need to help communities to
strengthen their resilience so that they can recover easily from the consequences (both
radiological and non-radiological) of a nuclear or radiological emergency should it happen
within their jurisdiction. This protection strategy helps these communities to clearly identify
protective actions and other response actions they need to take and how decisions are to be
made […] Thus, the strategy assists these communities in identifying how they can prepare
for an effective emergency response […]
Transparency: Transparency of the basis underpinning effective protection and safety in a
nuclear or radiological emergency is essential for ensuring that actions are planned that are
feasible to implement and that the planned actions are acceptable for all concerned parties.
[…]
3. PLANNING BASIS AND HAZARD ASSESSMENT
3.1 Planning basis
In order to develop the protection strategy, relevant information and data was collected and
studied at national level so that informed decisions are made about the potential nuclear or
radiological emergencies and their consequences warranting protective actions and other
response actions to be taken in Country A. Such information and data relates to (1) the
governmental, legal and regulatory framework currently in place, (2) the characteristics of the
facilities, activities and sources in Country A and beyond borders that can give rise to an
emergency, (3) the characteristics of the areas that can be potentially affected by the
129

consequences of an emergency and locations where emergency response actions might be
warranted as well as of potentially affected populations, (4) resources and infrastructure
available to support the implementation of the protection strategy, and (5) lessons learned
from past emergencies, including […], exercises as well as operational experience in
handling small scale events. It includes […]
The study of this information and data highlights the following: […]. These considerations
had the following impact on the development of the protection strategy: […]
3.2 Hazard assessment
In order to develop a protection strategy that addresses effectively potential hazards and
associated consequences of a nuclear or radiological emergency in the country, a hazard
assessment was performed as required in […] using the information and data from the
planning basis.
During this process, it was identified that Country A has facilities in the EPCs I, II and III as
well as areas in EPC V. Country A has also activities involving mobile radioactive sources in
EPC IV. Acts (criminal or intentionally unauthorized) within the same category were drawn
that may result in an emergency at any location, taking account of the results of the threat
assessment for nuclear security purposes. Emergency scenarios derived from the hazard
assessment have been studied and they have been grouped into the following three groups on
the basis for their familiarities and specifics for the applicable protection strategy:
(1) Severe nuclear emergency (emergency class: General Emergency) at facilities in
EPCs I and II or at a facility located across the border (EPC V), that is characterized
by extensive on-site and off-site consequences;
(2) Nuclear or radiological emergency (emergency class: Site area emergency or Facility
emergency) associated with facilities in EPCs I, II and III, that is characterized by onsite consequences within the site area or specific location within the facility;
(3) Radiological emergency (emergency class: Other nuclear or radiological emergency)
associated with activities and acts in EPC IV, that is characterized by on-site
consequences occurring at any location within the State.
The assessment has shown the following: […]
For the first group of potential emergency scenarios, that is characterized by both on-site and
off-site consequences, areas where protective actions and other response actions were
identified on the basis of assessing the impact of the emergency as a function of the distance
from the accident site, and taking into account national, regional and local circumstances. The
results of the assessments showed that […]. Additionally, a full range of postulated
emergency scenarios, as required in […], were considered in the process, such as […]. The
aim was to ensure that precautionary, urgent and early protective actions and other response
actions can be taken off-site effectively, regardless of the severity of the situation, the
limitations in information available and the large uncertainties. These areas relate to the four
emergency planning zones and distances required in […] as follows:
̶

A precautionary action zone (PAZ) for the area in which the focus is on taking
precautionary protective actions to avoid or minimize severe deterministic effects;
̶ An urgent protective action planning zone (UPZ) for the area in which the focus is on
taking urgent protective actions to reduce the risk of stochastic effects;
̶ An extended planning distance (EPD) for the area in which the focus is on taking early
protective actions to reduce the risk of stochastic effects on the basis of monitoring and
assessment;
130

̶ An ingestion and commodities planning distance (ICPD) for the area in which the focus
is on taking actions for ensuring food and commodities safety so that the risk of
stochastic effects is reduced.
The approximate radii that were justified and optimized to account for national, regional and
local circumstances are presented in Table I-1. While the areas for EPD and ICPD are
circular, the actual boundaries of the PAZ and UPZ consider the local circumstances and,
thus, follow other physical and geographical boundaries. The locations of these facilities and
the associated areas are shown in Appendix 1.
TABLE I-1. APPROXIMATE RADII OF EMERGENCY PLANNING ZONES AND
DISTANCES AROUND THE REACTOR SITES
Emergency planning zones and
distances

Approximate radii (km)
Nuclear Power Reactor
Research Reactor
(LWR, 2000 MW(th))
(100 MW(th))

PAZ

5

3

UPZ

30

15

EPD

100

50

ICPD

300

100

The second group of emergency scenarios may lead to the need for protective actions and
other response actions that are confined to the sites at known locations and under the
jurisdiction of the operating organization(s) with no radiological consequences expected offsite.
For the third group of emergency scenarios, that may happen at any location, protective
actions and other response actions would be warranted primarily within the inner cordoned
off area (or safety perimeter) established by the first responders or, when appropriate, the
operator. Determining the initial size of the inner cordoned off area needs to consider
observable conditions on the site (e.g. fire or explosion involving radioactive material or
visible damage to the shielding of radioactive material) or results of the radiation monitoring,
once available. The radii for the inner cordoned off area are given in Table I-2.
TABLE I-2. RADII FOR THE INNER CORDONED OFF AREA
Initial inner cordoned off area
(safety perimeter)

Situation
Initial determination – Outside
Unshielded od damaged potentially dangerous source

30 m radius around the source

Major spill from a potentially dangerous source

100 m radius around the source

Fire, explosion or fumes involving a dangerous source

300m radius

Suspected bomb (possible radiological dispersal
device), exploded or unexploded

400 m radius or more to protect
against an explosion

Conventional (non-nuclear) explosion or a fire
involving a nuclear weapon (no nuclear yield)

1000 m radius

131

Initial inner cordoned off area
(safety perimeter)

Situation
Initial determination – Inside
Damage, loss of shielding or spill involving a
potentially dangerous source

Affected and adjacent areas
(including floors above
below)

Fire or other event involving a potentially dangerous
source that can spread radioactive material
throughout the building ( e.g. through the ventilation
system)

Entire building and appropriate
outside distance as indicated
above

and

Expansion based on radiation monitoring
100 μSv/h at 1 m above ground level

Wherever
measured

these

levels

are

4. STRATEGY FOR REGAINING CONTROL AND MITIGATING CONSEQUENCES
ON THE SITE
The first goal of emergency response stipulated in this strategy relates to efforts made on the
source itself to mitigate the consequences. These efforts need to aim at preventing further
escalation of the event or emergency or delaying it to allow for effective protection of the
public. In case of a facility, activity or source under the responsibility of an operating
organization, this organization is responsible to ensure the above goal is achieved through
taking necessary actions to:
a) Return the facility and/or source to a controlled and stable state and prevent any release
or exposures;
b) Delay and/or reduce, when and as appropriate, any release or exposures, if the situation
escalated;
c) Take life-saving actions and protect individuals at the site (as either members of the
public or emergency workers, as appropriate, in line with the strategy provided in
Sections 5 and 6); and
d) Notify and keep informed the relevant off-site authority.
In the case of a dangerous source being involved in an emergency at any location (EPC IV)
with no operating organization to be accounted responsible for, meeting the first emergency
response goal remains under the responsibility of the first responders who need to take any
action to secure the source and to prevent further exposures of individuals from being in
contact or in proximity with the source. In this case, the strategy as elaborated in Sections 5
and 6 applies to ensure individuals (both members of the public and emergency workers) are
protected adequately.
In any case, prompt identification of an emergency, its notification and activation of the
emergency response is essential for implementing effectively the protection strategy both onsite and off-site so that all the goals of emergency response are achieved. To enable this,
facility/plant conditions (i.e. emergency actions levels (EALs)) and observable conditions at a
site indicating an emergency situation need to be identified by the operators and, when
appropriate, first responders so that the emergency class could be declared and emergency
132

response activated that is proportionate to the hazard posed by the respective emergency
class. The following emergency classification system (in terms of EPCs) needs to be used in
this context at all levels, in accordance with para. 5.14 of GSR Part 7 [I‒2]:
−

General emergency at facilities in category I or II:
o This emergency class is associated with the first group of emergency scenarios
discussed in Section 3.2 and warrants taking (precautionary, urgent and early)
protective actions and other response actions on the site and off the site, i.e. within
the predetermined emergency planning zones and distances.
o Upon declaration of this emergency class, the respective protection strategy
associated with the first group of emergency scenarios discussed in Section 3.2 need
to be implemented on-site and off-site in line with Sections 5 and 6.

−

Site area emergency at facilities in category I or II:
o This emergency class is associated with the second group of emergency scenarios
discussed in Section 3.2 and warrants taking protective actions and other response
actions on the site, increasing the readiness off-site should the situation escalates to
General emergency and monitoring in the vicinity of the site.
o Upon declaration of this emergency class, the respective protection strategy
associated with the second group of emergency scenarios discussed in Section 3.2
need to be implemented on-site in line with Sections 5 and 6. Nevertheless, off-site
response may still be warranted for this emergency class in relation to medical
management of those individuals who are actually or potentially exposed during the
emergency on-site or provision of public information.

−

Facility emergency at facilities in category I, II or III:
o This emergency class is associated with the second group of emergency scenarios
discussed in Section 3.2 and warrants taking protective actions and other response
actions at the facility and on the site but does not warrant taking protective actions
off the site.
o Upon declaration of this emergency class, the respective protection strategy
associated with the second group of emergency scenarios discussed in Section 3.2
need to be implemented at the facility in line with Sections 5 and 6. Nevertheless,
off-site response may still be warranted for this emergency class in relation to
medical management of those individuals who are actually or potentially exposed
during the emergency on-site.

−

Alert at facilities in category I, II or III:
o This emergency class is associated with events that warrant taking actions to assess
and to mitigate the potential consequences at the facility but does not pose on-site or
off-site hazard. Thus, no protection strategy is needed to be implemented for this
class.

−

Other nuclear or radiological emergency for an emergency in category IV:
o This emergency class is associated with the third group of emergency scenarios
discussed in Section 3.2 and warrants taking protective actions and other response
actions at any location.
o Upon declaration of this emergency class, the respective protection strategy
associated with the third group of emergency scenarios discussed in Section 3.2 need
to be implemented at the site in line with Sections 5 and 6.
133

5. PUBLIC PROTECTION STRATEGY
The public protection strategy has its specifics depending on the period of time after the
emergency onset. While at the first hours to, as appropriate, days and weeks after the
emergency onset the strategy focuses on public protection, afterwards the focus shifts to
preparations for resuming normal living conditions within the affected area. Thus, where this
is necessary, the public protection strategy addresses specifically the emergency response
phase and the transition phase allowing for effective emergency response from the emergency
onset by the time the emergency can be declared ended.
5.1 Description of the emergency phases
Emergency response phase is the period of time from the detection of conditions warranting
an emergency response until the completion of all the actions taken in anticipation of or in
response to the radiological conditions expected in the first days to the few months of the
emergency. The emergency response phase typically ends when the situation is under control,
the off-site radiological conditions have been characterized sufficiently well to identify
whether and where food restrictions and temporary relocation are required, and all required
food restrictions and temporary relocations have been put into effect.
The emergency response phase comprises of the urgent response phase and the early response
phase that have some specifics in relation to the development and implementation of the
protection strategy:
−

Urgent response phase is the period of time, within the emergency response phase, from
the detection of conditions warranting emergency response actions that must be taken
promptly in order to be effective until the completion of all such actions. Such
emergency response actions include mitigatory actions by the operator and urgent
protective actions on the site and off the site. The urgent response phase may last from
hours to days depending on the nature and scale of the nuclear or radiological
emergency.

−

Early response phase is the period of time, within the emergency response phase, from
which a radiological situation is already characterized sufficiently well that a need for
taking early protective actions and other response actions can be identified, until the
completion of all such actions. The early response phase may last from days to weeks
depending on the nature and scale of the nuclear or radiological emergency.

Transition phase is the period of time after the emergency response phase when (a) the
situation is under control, (b) detailed characterization of the radiological situation has been
carried out, and (c) activities are planned and implemented to prepare for the resumption of
normal social and economic activity. The transition phase ends with the emergency being
declared ended, beyond which point the situation is managed as either a planned exposure
situation or an existing exposure situation. The transition phase may last from days to
months, notwithstanding that for a small scale emergency (e.g. a radiological emergency
during transport or a radiological emergency involving a sealed dangerous source) the
transition phase may last not more than a day.
The different emergency phases are presented in Fig. I-1.

134

FIG. I-1. Temporal sequence of the various phases and exposure situations for a nuclear or
radiological emergency within a single geographical area or a single site [I‒3].

5.2 Decision making criteria
This section describes the dose criteria used in the protection strategy as either a decisionaiding tool for optimization of protection and safety or a trigger for the need to decide on
specific protective actions and other response actions. It also elaborates the aspects to be
considered when decisions need to be made to resume normal social and economic activity in
the aftermath of the nuclear or radiological emergency.
5.2.1 Reference level
Reference level relates to the level of effective dose above which it is judged inappropriate to
allow exposures to occur as a result of the exposure situation and below which optimization
of protection and safety applies. Thus, the reference level is set up and used in this strategy
not as a limit that may not be exceeded but as an upper constraint for optimization. Namely,
the reference level is used as a tool for optimization so that any optimization of protection
gives priority to exposures above the reference level with the possibility for the optimization
of protection to continue to be implemented below the reference level as long as this is
justified, i.e. does more good than harm.
A reference level of 100 mSv residual effective dose, acute or annual (given in Table I-3), has
been used in the development and optimization of the protection strategy. This value has been
chosen on the basis of […] as required in […]. The protection strategy was designed so that
no exposures will occur above this level should an emergency occur, and the best is done
under the prevailing circumstances so that doses are kept as low as reasonable below the
reference level. With this approach, it is ensured that, if the protection strategy is applied
effectively, no radiation induced health effects are to be observed among the affected
population.
Moreover, the reference level, as selected, needs to be used for comparison with the residual
doses assessed during an emergency response, so that a judgement is made on the
effectiveness of the protection strategy as implemented. In the case that exposures are
identified above the reference level, priority needs to be given to lowering these exposures
below the reference level and the available resources need to be allocated to achieve this. Any
action and the strategy to be applied at exposures below the reference level need to be proven
to be justified, i.e. that they do more good than harm.
For an emergency response during the urgent phase, there is no time for an optimization due
to the urgency associated with decision making and implementation of protective actions in
135

an effective manner. Therefore, a justified and optimized protection strategy for the urgent
phase is hereby agreed to the extent practicable, so that doses are kept below the reference
level. However, as the emergency evolves, particularly towards the transition phase, the time
available for assessing the strategy in place, its adaptation, justification and optimization
increases, and the abovementioned reference level needs to be used to assess the effectiveness
of the strategy and, for the optimization, of its adaptation.
With a successful implementation of the protection strategy through such iterative processes
for justification and optimization, it is expected that the residual doses will be increasingly
reduced with time, allowing lower levels for the residual doses to be used in deciding the
appropriateness for the situation to transit to an existing exposure situation and for the
emergency to be terminated. In this context, a residual dose approaching the order of 20 mSv
effective dose in a year (given in Table I-3) is considered as acceptable (as one of the
conditions) for the termination of the emergency, notwithstanding the fact that continued
efforts will likely be necessary to progressively reduce doses further in the longer term within
the framework of an existing exposure situation.
TABLE I-3. REFERENCE LEVEL FOR EMERGENCY EXPOSURE SITUATIONS
Emergency phase

Residual effective dose

Emergency response phase

100 mSv, acute or annual

Transition phase

20 mSv, annual

5.2.2 Generic criteria
Generic criteria present levels of projected doses or received doses at which protective
actions and other response actions need to be taken. Protective actions and other response
actions comprising the strategy are taken when projected doses (for protective actions) or
received doses (for medical actions) are exceeding the generic criteria provided in Tables I-4
to I-6. These generic criteria are hereby grouped in three sets.
The first set of generic criteria given in Table I-3 relates to doses received within a short
period of time (acute exposures) for which precautionary urgent protective actions and other
response actions are expected to be undertaken under any circumstances to avoid or minimize
severe deterministic effects. These criteria are associated with doses that, based on […], can
result in deterministic health effects in an individual that could be unequivocally attributed to
radiation exposure. Hence, these criteria, provided for RBE weighted absorbed dose to an
organ or tissue, represent a basis for taking precautionary urgent protective actions and other
response actions, before or shortly after the release or exposure occurs, primarily based on
observables or plant conditions.

136

TABLE I-4. GENERIC CRITERIA TO AVOID OR TO MINIMIZE SEVERE
DETERMINISTIC EFFECTS
Acute external exposure (<10
h)

Acute internal exposure due to an acute intake (Δ = 30 de)

AD(Δ)red
AD red marrow a

1 Gy

marrow

0.2 Gy for radionuclides with atomic number Z ≥ 90f
2 Gy for radionuclides with atomic number Z ≤ 89f

AD(Δ)thyroid 2 Gy
AD fetus
AD tissue

0.1b Gy

AD(Δ)lungh

30 Gy

c

25 Gy at 0.5 cm

AD(Δ)colon

20 Gy

AD skind

10 Gy to 100 cm2

AD(Δ′)fetusi

0.1b Gy

ADred marrow represents the average RBE weighted absorbed dose to internal tissues or organs (e.g. red marrow, lung, small intestine, gonads,
thyroid) and to the lens of the eye from exposure in a uniform field of strongly penetrating radiation.
b
At 0.1 Gy there would be only a very small probability of severe deterministic effects to the fetus and only during certain periods postconception (e.g. between 8 and 15 weeks of in utero development), and only if the dose is received at high dose rates. During other periods
post-conception and for lower dose rates, the fetus is less sensitive. There is a high probability of severe deterministic effects at 1 Gy.
Therefore, 1 Gy is to be used as the generic criterion for doses to the fetus received within a short period of time in relation to arrangements
to avoid or to minimize the occurrence of severe deterministic effects (e.g. such as in establishing a precautionary action zone).
c
Dose delivered to 100 cm at a depth of 0.5 cm under the body surface in tissue due to close contact with a radioactive source.
d
The dose is to the 100 cm dermis (skin structures at a depth of 40 mg/cm (or 0.4 mm) below the surface).
e
AD(Δ) is the RBE weighted absorbed dose delivered over a period of time Δ by the intake (I05) that will result in a severe deterministic
effect in 5% of exposed individuals.
f
Different generic criteria are used to take account of the significant difference in RBE weighted absorbed dose from exposure at the intake
threshold values specific for these two groups of radionuclides.
g
Based on the projected dose without decorporation.
h
For the purposes of these generic criteria, ‘lung’ means the alveolar–interstitial region of the respiratory tract.
i
For this particular case, ‘Δ’ refers to the period of in utero development of the embryo and fetus.
a

An example of such actions is evacuation within PAZ taken upon declaration of General
emergency. Taking effectively the precautionary urgent protective actions on the basis of
these generic criteria will ensure that no deterministic effects that could be attributed to
radiation exposure are to be observed in any individual. Should doses at this level be assessed
to have been received, then they provide a basis for identifying the need for medical
examination and screening followed, as required, by medical treatment.
The second set of generic criteria given in Table I-5 relates to doses at which protective
actions and other response actions need to be taken to reduce the risk of stochastic effects.
These criteria are associated with doses that, based on […], can result in an increased
incidence of stochastic effects in a population (i.e. increase in the frequency of radiation
induced cancers in a population) that could be attributed to radiation exposure through
epidemiological analysis, although radiation induced cancers cannot be unequivocally
attributed to radiation exposure on an individual basis. They are given for effective dose and
for the equivalent dose to an organ or tissue and provide a basis for taking urgent and early
protective actions and other response actions, as well as other activities aimed at enabling the
transition to an existing exposure situation. Examples of urgent and early protective actions
associated with these criteria are evacuation, sheltering, iodine thyroid blocking, relocation,
food restrictions, and restrictions on non-food commodities. If doses at this level are assessed
to have been received, then they provide a basis for identifying the need for longer term
medical follow-up to identify radiation induced cancers within affected populations early and
to treat them effectively.
137

Generic criteria to indicate the need to adapt or lift protective actions are associated with the
generic criteria given in Tables I-5 and I-6 and are discussed in Section 5.4.
TABLE I-5. GENERIC CRITERIA TO REDUCE THE RISK OF STOCHASTIC EFFECTS
Basis for
taking:

Urgent
protective
actions and
other response
actions

Generic
criteria

Projected dose
in the first 7
days

Projected dose
considering all
exposure
pathways

Projected dose
considering ingestion of
food or use of non-food
commodities, vehicles
and other items

Hthyroida

50 mSvb

-

-

Ec

100 mSv

Hfetusd

100 mSv

Early protective actions and other
response actions

100 mSv in the
first year
100 mSv for the
full period of inutero
development

10 mSv in the first year
10 mSv for the full
period of in-utero
development

Actions to enable
transitioning to
an existing
exposure
situation

Longer term
medical
actions

Projected dose
considering all
exposure
pathways

Received dose
considering
all exposure
pathways

-

-

20 mSv in the
first year
20 mSv for the
full period of inutero
development

100 mSv in a
month
100 mSv for
the full period
of in-utero
development

a

The equivalent dose to the thyroid (Hthyroid) only due to exposure to radioiodine.
This generic criterion applies only for administration of iodine thyroid blocking, if exposure due to radioactive iodine is
involved.
c
Effective dose.
b

d

Hfetus is the equivalent dose to the fetus, derived as the sum of the dose from external exposure and the maximum
committed equivalent dose to any organ of the embryo or fetus from intake to the embryo or fetus for different chemical
compounds and different times relative to conception.

The third set of generic criteria given in Table I-6 relates to doses at which other response
actions need to be taken to mitigate the non-radiological consequences, primarily the
economic impact, by providing basis for resumption of international trade of food and nonfood commodities.
TABLE I-6. GENERIC CRITERIA FOR TAKING RESTRICTIONS ON THE
INTERNATIONAL TRADE OF FOODSTUFF AND NON-FOOD COMMODITIES
Basis for taking restrictions
on the international trade of:

Food, milk and drinking water

Non-food commodities

Generic criteria for the projected dose
Ea

1 mSv in the first year

1 mSv in the first year

Hfetusb

1 mSv for the full period of inutero development

1 mSv for the full period of in-utero
development

a

Effective dose.

b

Hfetus is the equivalent dose to the fetus, derived as the sum of the dose from external exposure and the maximum
committed equivalent dose to any organ of the embryo or fetus from intake to the embryo or fetus for different chemical
compounds and different times relative to conception.

138

5.2.3 Operational criteria

As the generic criteria cannot be directly used in an emergency response, operational criteria
that are associated with directly measurable quantities or observable conditions are developed
on the basis of the generic criteria and elaborated in this section to provide for prompt
implementation of protective actions and other response actions considered in the protection
strategy without necessity for further assessments. The operational criteria used in the
emergency response include observable conditions on the site (primarily associated with the
third group of emergency scenarios; these are discussed in Section 4), emergency action
levels (EALs, which are facility specific conditions used to declare an emergency class and
activate the emergency response; these are discussed in Section 4) and operational
intervention levels (OILs, associated with any group of the emergency scenarios, which are
discussed in this section). OIL is a set level of a measurable quantity that corresponds to a
generic criterion and in the context of this strategy, it is typically expressed in terms of dose
rates, ground or surface activity concentrations, or activity concentrations of radionuclides in
environmental, food or water samples.
OILs for the emergency response phase are used immediately and directly (without further
assessment) to determine the appropriate protective actions on the basis of monitoring. In the
transition phase, OILs serve as a screening tool to support decision making on adapting or
lifting protective actions, including the determination of what protective actions may need to
be lifted or adapted, when the protective actions may need to be lifted or adapted and to
whom the decision may apply. In addition, they support implementation of activities to
enable the transition from an emergency exposure situation to an existing exposure situation
by providing a basis to guide simple activities aimed at reducing the residual doses. However,
any decision to be made during the transition phase takes account of the impact on the
residual doses against the reference level and any other relevant considerations.
OILs to be used to initiate protective actions and other response actions that are considered in
this strategy and their applicability per group of emergency scenarios are given in Table I-7.
OILs to be used to initiate discussions on adapting or lifting protective actions and other
response actions are discussed in Section 5.5.
The values for OILs given in Table I-7 have been developed on the basis of conservative
assumptions using the methodology provided in […] with account taken on the members of
the public who are most vulnerable to radiation exposure (i.e. children and pregnant women).
They can be revised in the course of emergency response only after convincing reasons
requiring their revision have become evident, for example any evidence showing that certain
parameters (e.g. consumption rates) are way too conservative for the actual situation affecting
certain foodstuff or region. The revision in such cases needs to be carefully justified and
implemented after the situation has been well understood, to follow the same methodology
for deriving OILs given in […] and not be too frequent so as to weaken the public trust in
authorities and in the response actions they have recommended.

139

TABLE I-7. OPERATIONAL INTERVENTION LEVELS TO INITIATE SPECIFIC
PROTECTIVE ACTIONS AND OTHER RESPONSE ACTIONS IN THE STRATEGY
AND THEIR APPLICABILITY

OIL

Default
OIL value

Protective actions to
be initiated
Monitoring type

Applicability per group of
emergency scenarios
considered in the strategy
1st

2nd

Evacuation and associated
response actions

■

■

Evacuation/Relocation and
associated response
actions

■

■

3rd

GROUND MONITORING
1000 µSv/h

OIL1

Ambient dose equivalent rate
at 1 m above ground level

50 cps

Alpha count rate at 0.5 cm
from the ground or surface

2000 cps

Beta count rate at 10 cm from
the ground or surface
GROUND MONITORING

100 µSv/h
OIL2

Ambient dose equivalent rate at
1 m above ground level

10 cps

Alpha count rate at 0.5 cm
from the ground or surface

200 cps

Beta count rate at 10 cm from
the ground or surface

■

GROUND MONITORING
1 µSv/h

OIL3

2 cps

20 cps

Ambient dose equivalent rate
at 1 m above ground level
Restrictions on food, milk
and drinking water and
Alpha count rate at 0.5 cm
associated response
from the ground or surface
actions

■

■

Beta count rate at 10 cm from
the ground or surface
SKIN MONITORING

1 µSv/h

OIL4

1000 cps

50 cps

OIL5

140

5 Bq/kg

Ambient dose equivalent rate
at 10 cm from the bare skin
of the hand and face
Decontamination of
Beta count rate at 2 cm from individuals and associated
the bare skin of the hand and
response actions
face

■

■

■

Alpha count rate at 0.5 cm
from the bare skin of the
hand and face
MONITORING OF FOOD,
MILK AND DRINKING
WATER SAMPLES

Restrictions on food,
milk and drinking water
and associated response

■

■

OIL

Default
OIL value

Protective actions to
be initiated
Monitoring type

Applicability per group of
emergency scenarios
considered in the strategy
1st

Gross activity of alpha (α)
emitting radionuclides in
food, milk and drinking water
samples

100 Bq/kg

OIL6

OIL7

see
Appendix 2

1000 Bq/kg
of I-131
and
200 Bq/kg
of Cs-137

0.5 µSv/h

MONITORING OF FOOD,
MILK AND DRINKING
WATER SAMPLES
Radionuclide specific activity
concentrations in food, milk
and drinking water samples
MONITORING OF FOOD,
MILK AND DRINKING
WATER SAMPLES
Activity concentration of I131f and Cs-137f in food,
milk and drinking water
samples

Ambient dose equivalent rate
in front of the thyroid in
contact with the skin
GROUND MONITORING

OILT

see
Appendix 2

Ambient dose equivalent rate
at 1 m above ground level
[…]
Radionuclide specific surface
activity concentrations
MONITORING OF NONFOOD COMMODITIES

OILc

see
Appendix 2

3rd

actions

Gross activity of beta (β)
emitting radionuclides in food,
milk and drinking water
samples

THYROID MONITORING
OIL8

2nd

Ambient dose equivalent rate
at 10 cm from the surface
[…]

Restrictions on food,
milk and drinking water
and associated response
actions

■

Restrictions on food,
milk and drinking water
and associated response
actions

■

Registration and
medical follow-up and
associated response
actions

■

Consider adapting
emergency response
actions and taking
activities to further
reduce residual doses

■

■

Restrictions on nonfood commodities and
associated response
actions

■

■

■

■

■

Radionuclide specific surface
activity concentrations

141

OIL

Default
OIL value

Protective actions to
be initiated
Monitoring type

MONITORING OF
VEHICLES, EQUIPMENT
AND OTHER ITEMS
OILV

see
Appendix 2

Ambient dose equivalent rate
at 10 cm from the surface
[…]

Restrictions on
vehicles, equipment and
other items leaving the
affected area and
associated response
actions

Applicability per group of
emergency scenarios
considered in the strategy
1st

2nd

3rd

■

■

■

Radionuclide specific surface
activity concentrations

see
Appendix 2

MONITORING OF FOOD
TRADED
INTERNATIONALLY
Radionuclide specific activity
concentrations in food, milk
and drinking water samples
MONITORING OF NONFOOD COMMODITIES
TRADED
INTERNATIONALLY

OILIntTrade
see
Appendix 2

Ambient dose equivalent rate
at 10 cm from the surface
[…]

Restrictions on
foodstuff intended for
international trade and
associated response
actions

Restrictions on nonfood commodities
intended for
international trade and
associated response
actions

■

■

Radionuclide specific surface
activity concentrations

5.2.4 Prerequisites for terminating the nuclear or radiological emergency
The objective of terminating the nuclear or radiological emergency is to facilitate the timely
resumption of normal social and economic activity. The termination marks the end of the
emergency and the start of planned or existing exposure situation for which other
requirements (i.e. applicable to either a planned exposure situation or an existing exposure
situation) are applied than those applicable to a nuclear or radiological emergency. The
activities aimed at enabling the termination and associated transition are undertaken primarily
during the transition phase and provide not only for public protection but also for the wellbeing of affected populations. During this period it is ensured that the emergency response
structure can be dismissed and all activities can be undertaken on a routine basis by relevant
organizations, while the situation involving the facility, activity or source can be managed as
a planned exposure situation irrespective whether it will be associated with decommissioning
of the facility, ending the operational life of the source or continuing normal operation.
A number of considerations, hereby referred to as prerequisites, have been formulated to
guide activities to be considered in the protection strategy during its adaptation based on
actual conditions in the course of the emergency. They are intended to be applied during the
transition phase to enable the termination of the nuclear or radiological emergency and
associated transition. The prerequisites are given in Table I-8 as applicable to the three
groups of emergency scenarios considered in the protection strategy.
142

The general prerequisites in Table I-8 are applicable, as appropriate, for any group of
emergency scenarios considered in the protection strategy. Specific prerequisites for the
transition to a planned exposure situation are applicable to the second group of emergency
scenarios as well as to those emergency scenarios in the third group that do not involve
release of radioactive material in the environment warranting decisions related to public
protection. Specific prerequisites for the transition to an existing exposure situation are
applicable to the first group of emergency scenarios considered in the strategy as well as to
those emergency scenarios in the third group that involve release of radioactive material in
the environment warranting protective actions and other response actions.
What prerequisites would be relevant for the actual conditions prevailing at the time of the
emergency, and the extent of their fulfilment, needs to be judged during the actual emergency
using Table I-8. Predicting accurately when, where and what the actual impact of the nuclear
or radiological emergency might be, as well as what the potential impact of non-radiological
factors, such as public concerns and the political situation, is not possible; consequently, the
protection strategy for the transition phase of the emergency response is less detailed in terms
of actual actions and activities to be carried out. However, once the situation is characterized
sufficiently well (even during the early response phase), the relevant prerequisites can be
selected and activities planned accordingly. Any decision to be made at this stage need to be
based on the extent of fulfilment of these prerequisites.
5.3 Processes for assessing the situation against decision making criteria and for making
the decisions
The priority of the protection strategy is to prevent people receiving high doses and being
exposed to high dose rates and, thus, to avoid severe deterministic effects among affected
populations or individuals. To achieve this goal, precautionary and urgent protective actions
and other response actions need to be taken effectively either before the release or exposures
occur, or shortly after the release or exposures occur. These emergency response actions are
to be taken on the basis of observed conditions at the facility or at the site. Thus, EALs and
other observables associated with the emergency classification system discussed in Section 4
are to be used in making decisions during the urgent response phase.

143

TABLE I-8. PREREQUISITES TO GUIDE ACTIVITIES TO BE TAKEN TO ENABLE
TERMINATION OF THE NUCLEAR OR RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCY AND
ASSOCIATED TRANSITION
GENERAL PREREQUISITES
(applicable to any emergency scenario)
□ Necessary urgent and early protective actions
implemented.
□ Exposure situation well understood and confirmed
to be stable.
□ Radiological situation well characterized, exposure
pathways identified and doses assessed for affected
populations.
□ Radiological situation assessed, as appropriate,
against the reference level and respective criteria.
□ Protection of all workers can be subjected to the
requirements for occupational exposure in planned
exposure situations.
□ Hazard assessment performed in respect of the
situation and its future development and its impact on
new EPR assessed.
□ The source secured in as required.

□ Revised or new EPR, if needed, formulated and
coordinated or an interim response capability put in
place.
□ Non-radiological consequences and other factors
(e.g. technology, land use options, availability of
resources and of social services) relevant to the
termination of the emergency identified, and actions to
address them considered.
□ A registry of those individuals who, by the time the
emergency is to be terminated, have been identified as
requiring longer term medical follow-up established.
□ Consideration given to the management of any
radioactive waste arising from the emergency, as
appropriate.
□ Interested parties consulted.
□ Relevant information communicated with the public.

SPECIFIC PREREQUISITES
(applicable in addition to General Prerequisites)
Transitioning to a planned
Transitioning to an existing
exposure situation
exposure situation
□ Circumstances that led to the emergency
analysed, corrective actions identified and
an action plan developed for the
implementation of corrective actions in
relation to the facility, activity or source
involved
in
the
emergency
or
administrative procedures established that
limit or prevent the use or handling of the
source until the circumstances that led to
the emergency have been better
understood.
□ Conditions assessed to ensure
compliance with the safe and secure
handling of the source involved in the
emergency.
□ Compliance confirmed with the dose
limits for public exposures in planned
exposure situations and, as appropriate,
with the requirements for medical
exposure.

144

□ Justified and optimized actions taken to meet the generic
criteria for enabling the transition and assessed residual doses
approach 20 mSv annual effective dose.
□ Areas delineated that are not permitted to be inhabited and
where it is not feasible to carry out social and economic activity
and administrative and other provisions established for them.
□ A strategy developed for the restoration of infrastructure,
workplaces and public services in the affected areas.
□ A mechanism and the means for continued communication and
consultation with all interested parties put in place.
□ Change or transfer of authority and responsibilities from the
emergency response organization to organizations responsible for
the long term recovery operations completed.
□ Sharing of any information and data completed among relevant
organizations and authorities.
□ Development of a long term monitoring strategy in relation to
residual contamination initiated.
□ Programme for longer term medical follow-up for the
registered individuals developed.
□ Strategy for mental health and psychosocial support for the
affected population developed.
□ Consideration given to the compensation of victims for damage
due to the emergency.
□ Administrative arrangements, legal provisions and regulatory
provisions put in place or being put in place for the management
of the existing exposure situation.

Although the EALs and other observables directly indicate the need to trigger specific
protective actions and other response actions during the urgent response phase, with account
taken of the generic criteria discussed in Section 5.2.1, they do not account for the prevailing
circumstances (such as weather conditions or other events occurring at the same time
rendering, for example, critical infrastructure unavailable) under which these emergency
response actions might need to be undertaken, raising the need to reconsider the
appropriateness of the pre-justified protective actions and the protection strategy before
progressing in the course of the actual emergency.
Therefore, to ensure a safe and effective implementation of these emergency response actions
during the urgent response phase, situation reports on the weather conditions, the status of the
critical infrastructure and resources necessary for safe implementation of emergency response
actions (and on any concurring events that may impact the emergency response) needs to be
advised quickly so that decisions are made timely without jeopardizing the effectiveness of
the planned protection strategy. Moreover, as the impact of the emergency might spread over
wide areas and strain the resources available for a safe and effective implementation of the
planned protection strategy, use of weather forecast, projections of how the released
radioactive material may spread or readings of stationary monitoring systems might provide
useful information to enable optimal use of the available resources, should this be necessary,
for the sake of effectively implementing the strategy without endangering those in need.
Once the protection strategy for the urgent response phase is implemented, taking account of
the specifics of the situation, it will be necessary to periodically reassess the situation to
determine whether the protective actions and the protection strategy continue to be justified
(by doing more good than harm) and to provide the best under the prevailing circumstances,
considering any new information that becomes available. Such a reassessment starts in the
early response phase and is primarily getting use of monitoring results upon which protective
actions and the protection strategy are adapted on the basis of OILs through either expanding
the protective actions in other areas and population groups, or their lifting as being not
justified anymore. The focus of the protection strategy during the early response phase is to
reduce the risk of stochastic effects among affected populations through identifying all those
who might receive doses exceeding the generic criteria, taking early protective actions and
other response actions for them and preventing the spread of contamination. In identifying all
those for whom early protective actions and other response actions are needed, use of various
tools and projections, as discussed for the urgent response phase, may be useful. However,
decisions on taking emergency response actions, which include those for reducing the risk for
stochastic effects and for preventing the spread of contamination, are made against OILs
using the results from monitoring performed in predefined areas. During the early response
phase, as the characterization of the radiological situation progresses, assessment of the
effectiveness of the protection strategy in place against the selected reference level is
expected to be done. Such exercise helps determining the result of implementation of the
protection strategy under the prevailing circumstances as well as identifying for whom more
needs to be done. Although for the early response phase the strategy is quite pre-planned in
detail, to the extent possible, and there is limited time available to go through thorough
justification and optimization of protection and safety, there may be circumstances
warranting such an adaptation of the protection strategy to account for various nonradiological factors existing at the time, in order to ensure that a justified and optimized
strategy is applied at all times and under all circumstances.
Once all public protective actions are implemented, the return to normality by resuming
normal social and economic activity in the affected areas and providing for the well-being of
affected individuals comes increasingly in the focus of the protection strategy. As the
145

emergency progresses, there is a progressively greater understanding of the precise nature of
the emergency and the circumstances surrounding it. As a consequence, decision making is
based on actual conditions rather than pre-planned response, to a progressively greater extent.
Namely, during this phase of the emergency response, use of monitoring results against OILs
is done only as a screening means to initiate discussion on the need to adapt or lift protective
actions and associated arrangements in place or to take activities to further reduce exposures.
Any decision during this phase is done after careful assessment of the radiological situation,
which includes the assessment of residual doses and their comparison against the selected
reference level, with account taken of various non-radiological conditions that need to be
fulfilled against the prerequisites for the transitioning. Any adaptation of the protection
strategy in place needs to be thoroughly justified and optimized, with account taken of
various radiological and non-radiological factors. During the transition phase, as the
emergency response efforts are increasingly focused on restoring the functionality of
communities, the processes of justification and optimization are applied more rigorously, as
the time allows, through an approach that is necessarily emergency- and site-specific and,
thus, cannot be pre-planned in detail.
It is important to note that such delineation in time and space may not be possible in the
course of the actual emergency, and that overlaps in implementing the different aspects of the
strategy to certain extent are to be expected.
The process for assessing the situation in the course of an emergency response so that
decisions are made on the protection strategy to be applied on the basis of the decision
making criteria is shown in Fig. I-2. The process describing how decisions on protective
actions and other response actions are made, and how this process changes with time (i.e.
how the strategy is adapted with time) is shown in Fig. I-3 for the three groups of emergency
scenarios considered in the protection strategy. The process for assessment of the
effectiveness of the adapted protection strategy and its adaptation in the course of the
emergency response is shown in Fig. I-4.
5.4 Process for adapting or lifting protective actions and other response actions
Once individual protective actions and other response actions are no longer justified, they
need to be adapted or lifted. While judgement on the protective actions and other response
actions to be taken in the course of the emergency response is a more straightforward process
utilizing the OILs, adapting or lifting protective actions needs to consider also nonradiological factors. In addition, it needs to be clearly communicated to all concerned parties
as to whom and where decision on adaptation or lifting applies and as of when it applies
together with any information explaining the rationale for the decision.
Initiating considerations on adapting or lifting protective actions and other response actions
can be taken once the following conditions have been considered:
 Any limitations associated with the protective actions itself (e.g. related to its duration
or effectiveness);
 The radiological situation and its assessment against reference levels, generic and
operational criteria, as appropriate, including assessment of the impact of adapting
and/or lifting protective actions on the residual doses against the reference level;
 Other non-radiological factors relevant for the adaptation or lifting of protective actions
that may be associated, e.g. with conditions that provide for the well-being of the
affected population and with the conduct of normal social and economic activity;
146

 The need for the protective action to be adapted and/or lifted at different times in
different areas or for different population groups;
 The need to consult concerned parties and to provide relevant information to them
including on the rationale for the adaptation and/or lifting and on how this adaptation or
lifting will affect them.
The generic criteria to indicate the need to adapt or lift protective actions are associated with
those given in Tables I-4 to I-6 for initiating specific protective actions and other response
actions and are presented in Table I-9 for individual protective actions.

147

148

FIG. I-2. The process for assessing the situation in the course of an emergency response against decision making criteria.

(a)

149

(b)
150

151

FIG. I-3. The process describing how decisions on protective actions and other response actions are made and how theses changes with
time for (a) the first group, (b) the second group and (c) the third group of emergency scenarios considered in the protection strategy.

(c)

(a)
152

153

FIG. I-4. The process for adaptation of the protection strategy in the course of the emergency response during
the early response phase (a) and the transition phase (b) [I‒3].

(b)

The OILs to be used to initiate discussions on adapting or lifting protective actions and other
response actions and associated considerations are also given in Table I-9 together with
different considerations to be taken into account before decision on adapting or lifting
protective actions is made. The values for OILs given in Table I-9 have been developed on
the basis of conservative assumptions using the methodology provided in […] with account
taken on the members of the public who are most vulnerable to radiation exposure (i.e.
children and pregnant women) and take account of the generic criteria and OILs given in
Tables I-5 and I-6 for initiating protective actions and other response actions. They can be
revised in the course of emergency response only after convincing reasons requiring their
revision have become evident as for any other OILs.
TABLE I-9. CRITERIA FOR INITIATING CONSIDERATIONS TO ADAPT OR LIFT
SPECIFIC PROTECTIVE ACTIONS AND OTHER RESPONSE ACTIONS
Generic criteria for
considering to adapt/lift the
action
Protective
action
E*

Hfetus **
for the full
period of in
utero
development

OILs for
considering
to adapt/lift
the action

Additional considerations

Not intended to be applied for long
durations.

≥100 mSv in
the first year

≥100 mSv

≥OIL2

Substitute evacuation with relocation after it
has been confirmed that adequate living
conditions for individuals are ensured,
arrangements for granting short term access
to evacuated areas is allowed in a controlled
manner to evacuees to prepare for longer
term relocation, impact the substitution may
have on residual dose has been assessed and
clear instructions are given to evacuees.

Evacuation
Lift the evacuation after it has been
confirmed that only limited restrictions are
still necessary for people living normally in
the area, with account taken of assessed
residual doses against the pre-set reference
level and the following conditions are met:
<100 mSv in
the first year

<100 mSv

<OIL2

- Infrastructure and public services are in
place (e.g. public transportation, shops and
markets, schools, nurseries, health care
facilities, police and firefighting services,
water services, sanitation, energy supplies,
telecommunication networks).
- Clear instructions and advice on the
restrictions still in place and the
recommended changes to behaviours and

154

Protective
action

Generic criteria for
considering to adapt/lift the
action

OILs for
considering
to adapt/lift
the action

Additional considerations
habits, including land use, have been
provided to those returning.
- Public support centre(s) and informational
material (e.g. leaflets, posters) for public
reassurance and psychosocial support are
available to those returning.
- A strategy has been established for the
restoration of workplaces and for the
provision of social support.
- Information on the likely evolution of the
exposure situation and the associated health
hazards has been provided to those
returning.

≤20 mSv per
year

≤20 mSv

<OILT

Lift the evacuation along with the decision
to terminate the emergency within the
affected area if the prerequisites to do so are
met and the following is achieved:
- Infrastructure and public services are in
place (e.g. public transportation, shops and
markets, schools, nurseries, health care
facilities, police and firefighting services,
water services, sanitation, energy supplies,
telecommunication networks).
- Clear instructions and advice on the
restrictions still in place and the
recommended changes to behaviours and
habits, including land use, have been
provided to those returning.
- Public support centre(s) and informational
material (e.g. leaflets, posters) for public
reassurance and psychosocial support are
available to those returning.
- A strategy has been established for the
restoration of workplaces and for the
provision of social support.
- Information on the likely evolution of the
exposure situation and the associated health
hazards has been provided to those
returning.
Not appropriate as longer term action,
typically a few days.

Sheltering

N.A.

N.A.

N.A.

Lift sheltering if taken precautionary in case
of positive evolution of the event fully or
partially. Assess the impact the lifting may
have on residual dose and make informed
decision
based
on
the
following
information:
- The evolution of the release;
- The level of contamination in the
environment;
- The level of protection offered by the type
of buildings used for sheltering (shielding
factor and tightness against diffusion of
outside atmosphere);

155

Protective
action

Generic criteria for
considering to adapt/lift the
action

OILs for
considering
to adapt/lift
the action

Additional considerations
- The need for continued simultaneous
administration of ITB, and the medical care
and hygiene needs of those sheltered
(availability of medicines, food supplies,
etc.);
- Any necessity to gradually increase the
time members of the public are allowed to
spend outdoors, before sheltering is fully
lifted; and
- The need for further protective actions
based on generic criteria and OILs to
replace sheltering (e.g. evacuation or
relocation).
In all other cases, consider to substitute the
sheltering with other protective actions (e.g.
evacuation or relocation) depending on the
criteria exceeded or once preparations to
safely evacuate or relocate individuals are
completed.

Iodine thyroid
blocking

N.A.

<100 mSv in
the first year

N.A.

<100 mSv

N.A.

<OIL2

Relocation

≤20 mSv per
year

156

≤20 mSv

<OILT

Lift after the first administration unless
second administration is indicated.

Lift the evacuation after it has been
confirmed that only limited restrictions are
still necessary for people living normally in
the area, with account taken of assessed
residual doses against the pre-set reference
level and the following conditions are met:
- Infrastructure and public services are in
place (e.g. public transportation, shops and
markets, schools, nurseries, health care
facilities, police and firefighting services,
water services, sanitation, energy supplies,
telecommunication networks).
- Clear instructions and advice on the
restrictions still in place and the
recommended changes to behaviours and
habits, including land use, have been
provided to those returning.
- Public support centre(s) and informational
material (e.g. leaflets, posters) for public
reassurance and psychosocial support are
available to those returning.
- A strategy has been established for the
restoration of workplaces and for the
provision of social support.
- Information on the likely evolution of the
exposure situation and the associated health
hazards has been provided to those
returning.
Lift the evacuation along with the decision
to terminate the emergency within the
affected area if the prerequisites to do so are
met and the following is achieved:
- Infrastructure and public services are in
place (e.g. public transportation, shops and
markets, schools, nurseries, health care
facilities, police and firefighting services,

Protective
action

Generic criteria for
considering to adapt/lift the
action

OILs for
considering
to adapt/lift
the action

Additional considerations
water services, sanitation, energy supplies,
telecommunication networks).
- Clear instructions and advice on the
restrictions still in place and the
recommended changes to behaviours and
habits, including land use, have been
provided to those returning.
- Public support centre(s) and informational
material (e.g. leaflets, posters) for public
reassurance and psychosocial support are
available to those returning.
- A strategy has been established for the
restoration of workplaces and for the
provision of social support.
- Information on the likely evolution of the
exposure situation and the associated health
hazards has been provided to those
returning.

Food, milk and
drinking water
restrictions in
affected areas

<10 mSv in the
first year

<10 mSv

<OIL6

Lift the restriction only after estimation of
the actual doses from the ingestion pathway
and their contribution to the residual dose
from all exposure pathways.

Food, milk and
drinking water
restrictions for
international
trade

<1 mSv per
year

<1 mSv

< OILInterTrade,F

Lift restrictions on international trade for
infant and non-infant food

Non-food
commodity
restrictions in
affected areas

<10 mSv in the
first year

<10 mSv

<OILC

Lift the restriction only after estimation of
the actual doses from the use of non-food
commodities and their contribution to the
residual dose from all exposure pathways.

Non-food
commodity
restrictions in
affected areas for
international
trade

<1 mSv per
year

<1 mSv

Restriction of
vehicles,
equipment and
other items
leaving the
affected area

<10 mSv in the
first year

<10 mSv

<
OILInterTrade,C

<OILV

Lift restrictions on trading
commodities internationally.

non-food

Lift the restriction only after estimation of
the actual doses from the use of vehicles,
equipment and other items and their
contribution to the residual dose from all
exposure pathways.

* Effective dose.
** Equivalent dose to the fetus.

The process for adapting and/or lifting protective actions is presented in Fig. I-5. Initial
consideration whether a protective action is justified is made on the basis of the criteria
established for their initiation (see Tables I-5 and I-6). However, there may be circumstances
that, despite the criteria are still exceeded, other conditions render the protective action
unjustified (e.g. significant decline in the reserves of essential foods in relation to food
restrictions), warranting considerations be given for its adaptation. If this is the case or the
criteria for taking that action are not exceeded anymore, then consideration is given, if
relevant, on whether another criterion for taking other protective actions is exceeded. This
157

may be relevant, for example, in the case of sheltering or evacuation. In the case that criteria
for another action are exceeded, then substituting the initial action with the other action is an
option, after having considered any other conditions that may need to be fulfilled (e.g. if
evacuation is substituted with relocation, other conditions relate to the considerations to
substituting evacuation with relocation given in Table I-9). If such consideration is not
relevant, then the protective action can be considered for lifting, provided that the impact the
lifting has on the residual doses is assessed against the reference level and other relevant
preconditions (given in Table I-9) are fulfilled. The process for adapting or lifting protective
actions is presented in Fig. I-5. Applying this process is intended to ensure that protective
actions or their adaptation or lifting are always justified and optimized, with account taken of
radiological as well as non-radiological considerations.

FIG. I-5. Process for adapting or lifting protective actions.

5.5 Protective actions and other response actions to be implemented
The key protective actions considered in this strategy are evacuation, sheltering, iodine
thyroid blocking, relocation, restrictions on consumption of food, milk and drinking water,
restrictions on use of non-food commodities, contamination control and decontamination, and
prevention of inadvertent ingestion.
Evacuation is the rapid, temporary removal of people from an area to avoid or reduce short
term radiation exposure. By removing people from the location of the immediate hazard in a
nuclear or radiological emergency, evacuation protects them from all the exposure pathways.
However, it results in people being (compulsorily) moved to temporary accommodation,
which is unlikely to be suitable for residence for more than a few days.
Sheltering is the short term use of a structure for protection from an airborne plume and/or
deposited radioactive material. Sheltering is an urgent protective action, used to provide
158

shielding against external exposure and to reduce the intake of airborne radionuclides by
inhalation. It consists of going inside a suitable building (a private house, a multi-storey
building, a commercial mall, a private or public shelter), closing doors, windows and vents,
shutting off all ventilation systems, listening to the information and further recommendations
and advice provided by the authorities, through the media or other means of communication.
Sheltering is a short term measure and can only be used for a short period (not more than 48
hours). In the case of a protracted release (expected to last for more than two days),
evacuation of sheltered people between two releases, or during periods of reduced release,
may need to be considered and carried out, if justified.
Iodine thyroid blocking (ITB) is the administration of a compound of stable iodine (usually
potassium iodide) to prevent or reduce the uptake of radioactive isotopes of iodine by the
thyroid in a nuclear or radiological emergency involving radioactive iodine. Iodine thyroid
blocking is an urgent protective action. Stable iodine is generally administered as a single
dose that is judged be sufficient to give protection to the thyroid for 24 hours. In the event of
prolonged release, when evacuation is not possible or unsafe, repeated dosing might be
judged appropriate to prolong thyroid protection provided second dose is available to do so.
Repeated dosing is not advised for neonates, pregnant and breastfeeding women and older
adults (over 60 years).
Food, milk and drinking water restrictions relate to the actions taken to protect the food chain
and water supply systems (e.g. milk from grazing animals or drinking water using open
sources (such as rain water)) from getting contaminated in a nuclear or radiological
emergency as well as to the actions taken to protect individuals from ingestion of potentially
or actually contaminated food, milk and drinking water (such as locally produced vegetables)
in the emergency. The end goal of taking this action is to prevent or reduce the internal
exposure due to the consumption of potentially or actually contaminated food products, milk
and drinking water. Food, milk and drinking water restrictions have to be initiated as soon as
possible in the urgent response phase. These restrictions could remain in place in longer term
(even within the framework of an existing exposure situation).
Relocation is the non-urgent removal or extended exclusion of people from an area to avoid
long term exposure from deposited radioactive material. Relocation is an early protective
action. It may be a substitution for the evacuation. Relocation is considered to be permanent
relocation if return is not foreseeable; otherwise it is temporary relocation. Relocation is used
to prevent or significantly reduce further exposures from all exposure pathways (notably
external exposure, inhalation of resuspended material and inadvertent ingestion) from
radioactive material deposited on the ground and other surfaces, including indoor
contamination. Relocation can last for weeks or months (temporary relocation) or indefinitely
(permanent relocation).
Restrictions on non-food commodities relate to the actions taken to protect non-food
commodities from getting contaminated in a nuclear or radiological emergency as well as to
the actions taken to protect individuals from use of non-food commodities that are potentially
or actually contaminated in the emergency. The term non-food commodities is broad and
encompasses vehicles, cargoes, various items for use (such as plates, toys or cutleries) and
any item intended for public use that is not a food but may get contaminated in an emergency.
The end goal of taking this action is to prevent or reduce the external exposure and internal
exposure (through inadvertent ingestion primarily) due to the use of potentially or actually
contaminated non-food commodities. Non-food commodities’ restrictions need to be initiated
as soon as in the urgent response phase as a precaution. These restrictions could then be

159

adapted during the early response phase and the transition phase, once radiation monitoring
results become available.
Contamination control relates to various actions and measures taken to prevent spreading of
contamination from an affected area in a nuclear or radiological emergency. These include
measures taken to ensure control is in place on what enters in and exits from the affected area
(access control), radiation monitoring of people, vehicles, equipment and other items leaving
the affected area and their decontamination, when appropriate. Access control involves
setting up barriers to an affected area and maintaining them to ensure that people and vehicles
including related items do not enter or exit the area unless authorized to do so, they are
monitored and, where necessary, decontaminated. Such controls not only help preventing the
contamination is spread outside the restricted areas, but help ensuring systematic control of
exposures incurred by people (such as restoration workers, farmers caring for what was left
behind) spending time in restricted area. Contamination control needs to be put in place as
early as in the urgent response phase and mostly maintained during the emergency response
phase. Some aspects of contamination control need to be maintained for a longer period
during the transition phase as well as after the emergency is terminated, for example, for
workers and helpers involved in restoration activities in restricted access areas and for (duly
authorized) people re-entering restricted areas. Access control needs to be put in place once
areas have been evacuated/relocated and maintained until return or free access is authorized.
Access control to highly contaminated areas are likely to be maintained in the existing
exposure situation, e.g. for workers involved in the rehabilitation works.
Decontamination is the complete or partial removal of contamination by a deliberate
physical, chemical or biological process. It includes a wide range of processes for removing
contamination from people, equipment and buildings, but to exclude the removal of
radionuclides from within the human body or the removal of radionuclides by natural
weathering or migration processes, which are not considered to be decontamination. Personal
decontamination processes may range from simply changing clothes, washing or showering
to assisted decontamination, performed by trained personnel in special installations, possibly
under medical supervision.
Access control, radiation monitoring and decontamination, where necessary, can also play a
key role in public reassurance, especially to those resettled as well as for people who receive
them.
Prevention of inadvertent ingestion relates to advise being given not to drink, eat or smoke
and to keep hands away from the mouth until hands are washed and not to play on the ground
or do other activities that could result in the creation of dust that could be ingested or inhaled.
Although simple action following general hygiene rules, the advice aims at reducing
ingestion and inhalation of released or resuspended radioactive material. Prevention of
inadvertent ingestion could be advised during the emergency response phase (for people
sheltered or undergoing evacuation or preparing for relocation or emergency workers in the
affected areas) as well as during the transition phase (e.g. for people returning in an areas
with limited restrictions still in place and emergency workers and helpers performing some
tasks within the affected areas). The advice may extend even in longer term, e.g. in delineated
areas to which access has been granted to duly authorized persons and to workers and helpers
involved in restoration works.
The suite of protective actions, other response actions and associated considerations of the
strategy to protect the public for the three groups of emergency scenarios are given in Tables
I-10 to I-12. These tables contain also information about the basis for taking the suite of

160

emergency response actions and the time allowing for their effective implementation per
emergency phase.
5.6 Consultation with the public and other interested parties
Although the opinion of the public, the affected populations in particular, and other interested
parties are useful input to adapting the protection strategy, during the response, the ultimate
authority and final decisions remain with the decision making body. Thus, any consultation
during the emergency response is to be organized in such a manner so as not to delay timely
and efficient decision making.
During the urgent response phase, the effectiveness of protective actions and other response
actions is critically dependent on their urgent implementation such that there is insufficient
time to allow consultation to take place. Consultation is thus likely to be non-existent in the
urgent response phase but would be expected to increase as the early response phase develops
and during the transition phase, as the situation stabilizes (see Fig. I-6). It is anticipated that
progressively more consultation occurs as time permits, and as more information becomes
available. During the transition phase, it is possible to increase the involvement of interested
parties in the adaptation of the protection strategy, while not delaying its optimal
implementation.

FIG. I-6. Involvement of, and consultation with, interested parties during different phases
of a nuclear or radiological emergency [I‒3].
The number of interested parties and the issues they are interested in are expected to vary as
the emergency progresses and its impact is better known, with a tendency to increase with
time and in comparison to the preparedness stage. Moreover, it is to be expected that, during
the emergency response, the number of interested parties and their representatives may
change from the ones who were engaged and consulted during the preparedness stage, raising
the need for proper communication during the consultation process in the emergency
response without assuming any previous knowledge on the topic of interest, so that it is
ensured meaningful inputs are obtained.

161

162
Instructs those responsible
for transportation systems
(air, land, sea) to avoid the
UPZ

-

Evacuate the population
within PAZ

Shelter the population
within UPZ until
evacuation, as appropriate

Reduce inadvertent
ingestion within PAZ,
UPZ and EPD

Protect the food chain
and drinking water
supplies from getting
contaminated within
ICPD (e.g. place grazing
animals on protected
feed, disconnect
rainwater collection pipes
and cover open sources of
drinking water);

Stop the consumption and
distribution of nonessential food and feed

-

-

-

-

-

Provide for medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
affected population
Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed
Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers
including medical staff in
hospitals carrying for

-

-

-

Monitor those who were in
the PAZ and UPZ to identify
those for whom
decontamination and/or
medical action may be
needed

Register those who were in
the PAZ and UPZ

Place access control in the
PAZ and UPZ

-

Take iodine thyroid
blocking (if release of
radioiodine is expected)
by administering stable
iodine agents within PAZ
and UPZ

-

Urgent
response
phase

-

Other response actions

Protective actions

Phase
Notification
on the
declaration
of General
emergency

Basis
Hours to
days

Time to
implement

Do not delay provision of
medical treatment to those in
need irrespective of the
presence of contamination
(including those presenting
symptoms of radiation
overexposure)
Do not delay the evacuation of
PAZ with actions taken in
UPZ
Evacuate those in PAZ beyond
EPD. Evacuate UPZ if
potential for severe release
persists
Issue instructions to those

-

-

-

-

Give clear instructions
regarding emergency response
actions to concerned parties
including on the treatment of
pets

Confirm arrangements in place
for safe evacuation of special
facilities or population groups

-

-

Assess overall situation to
ensure safe implementation of
emergency response actions

-

Other considerations

TABLE I-10. SUITE OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTIONS AND ASSOCIATED CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE FIRST GROUP OF
EMERGENCY SCENARIOS

163

Phase

Protect relevant non-food
commodities from getting
contaminated within
ICPD

Stop the use and
distribution of nonessential non-food
commodities within
ICPD

Stop international trade of
potentially contaminated
foodstuff and non-food
commodities

-

-

-

(e.g. local produce, wildgrown products, milk
from grazing animal,
rainwater and animal
feed) within ICPD

Protective actions
patients to be evacuated

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement

Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise
Alert hospitals and medical
staff to prepare to treat
contaminated and exposed
individuals

-

-

Provide, where appropriate,
supplies with clean food, milk,
drinking water as well as
animal feed

-

Lift sheltering after a day to
two days by substituting with
evacuation or allowing for
partial/fully lifting

Provide support to those
sheltered for access to
essentials and medicines

-

-

Give instructions for proper
sheltering considering also
those populations groups
without proper shelter (e.g.
tourists in mobile home or
tents)

-

refusing to evacuate

Other considerations

164

Phase

Protective actions

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement
Begin implementation of
controls to ensure all trade
meets international standards
and to reassure interested
parties (e.g. through
certification) using
OILIntTrade,F/C
Increase readiness for timely
deployment of monitoring
teams following the release in
areas beyond UPZ where
deposition sufficient to
warrant taking urgent
protective actions is expected
Begin implementing controls
on vehicles, items and other
equipment exiting the affected
areas using OILV to determine
whether they are safe for use
and any need for
decontamination
Assess the results from skin
and thyroid monitoring to
decide on the course of
medical action and need for
individual decontamination
using OIL4 and OIL8
Instruct affected population to
decontaminate, if appropriate,
by removing outer clothing

-

-

-

-

-

Other considerations

165

Other response actions

Place access control in these
areas
Register those who were in
these areas
Monitor those who were in
these areas to identify those
for whom decontamination
and/or medical action may
be needed
Provide for medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
affected population from
these areas
Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed
Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers
including medical staff in
hospitals carrying for
patients to be evacuated and
members of monitoring
teams

-

-

-

-

-

Protective actions

Take iodine thyroid
blocking (if release of
radioiodine is expected)
by administering stable
iodine agents in the areas
beyond UPZ with early
high deposition

Evacuate the population
in areas beyond UPZ with
early high deposition

-

-

Phase

Urgent
response
phase
OIL1

Basis

A day

Time to
implement

Assess overall situation to
ensure safe implementation of
emergency response actions
Remind those in these areas on
instructions how to reduce
inadvertent ingestion
Give clear instructions
regarding emergency response
actions to concerned parties
including on the treatment of
pets
Issue instructions to those
refusing to evacuate
Assess the results from skin
and thyroid monitoring to
decide on the course of
medical action and need for
individual decontamination
using OIL4 and OIL8
Instruct affected population to
decontaminate, if appropriate,
by removing outer clothing

-

-

-

-

Consider these actions after
the beginning of the release

-

-

and washing hands and face

Other considerations

166
Other response actions

Register those who may
have consumed
contaminated foodstuff
Provide for medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
affected population from
these areas
Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed
Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as

-

-

-

-

Protective actions

Stop the consumption and
distribution of nonessential food and feed
(e.g. local produce, wildgrown products, milk
from grazing animal,
rainwater and animal
feed) in areas beyond
ICPD with early high
deposition

Stop the use and
distribution of nonessential non-food
commodities in areas

-

-

Phase

Urgent
response
phase
OIL3

Basis

Days

Time to
implement

Assess the situation to ensure
safe implementation of
emergency response actions
Provide, as appropriate,
supplies with clean food, milk,
drinking water as well as
animal feed
In case of lack of essential
foodstuff, consider other
protective actions such as
relocating people from these

-

-

-

Ensure controls are in place
for preventing the spread of
contamination (using OILV, as
appropriate)

-

Consider these actions after
the beginning of release

Provide, where appropriate,
supplies with clean food, milk,
drinking water as well as
animal feed

-

-

Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise

-

and washing hands and face

Other considerations

167

Early
response
phase

Phase

Stop the international
trade of foodstuff and
other goods from areas
beyond ICPD with early
high deposition

Relocate population from
areas within EPD with
high ground deposition

-

-

beyond ICPD with early
high deposition

Protective actions

Register those individuals
from these areas
Provide for medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
affected population from
these areas
Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed
Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers

-

-

-

-

emergency workers
including the members of
monitoring teams

Other response actions

OIL2

Basis

A week to
a month

Time to
implement

Give instructions for proper
management of human and
animal remains with actual or
possible contamination

-

Assess the results from skin
and thyroid monitoring to
decide on the course of
medical action and need for
individual decontamination
using OIL4 and OIL8

Issue instructions to those
refusing to relocate

-

Assess overall situation to
ensure safe implementation of
emergency response actions

-

Consider these actions after
the release seized

Ensure controls are in place
for preventing the spread of
contamination (using OILV, as
appropriate)

-

-

Implement controls to ensure
all trade meets international
standards and to reassure
interested parties (e.g. through
certification) using
OILIntTrade,F/C

-

areas

Other considerations

168

Evacuation

Restrictions on the
consumption and

-

-

Adaptation of protective actions imposed during the
urgent response phase:
-

Early
response
phase

Provide medical care and
mental health and

Delineate areas and
implement administrative
measures as appropriate

Ensure access control is in
place

Other response actions

Protective actions

Phase

Table I-9

In line with

Basis

Weeks to
months

Time to
implement

Give instructions for proper
management of human and
animal remains with actual or
possible contamination

-

Use monitoring results against
OILs and associated
considerations to determine
which protective actions taken
precautionary during the

Ensure controls are in place
for preventing the spread of
contamination (using OILV, as
appropriate)

-

-

Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise

-

Initiate activities to
characterize the situation well

Consider if evacuation in
certain areas needs to be
substituted with relocation

-

-

Instruct affected population to
decontaminate, if appropriate,
by removing outer clothing
and washing hands and face

-

Other considerations

169

Phase

Restrictions on the use
and distribution of nonessential non-food
commodities

Reducing inadvertent
ingestion

Restrictions on
international trade of
contaminated foodstuff
and non-food
commodities

-

-

-

distribution of nonessential food and feed

Protective actions

Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed
Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers
Protect members from the
public volunteering in the
emergency response as
helpers in an emergency

-

-

-

psychosocial support to
affected population

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement

Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise
Ensure control is in place to
ensure all trade meets
international standards and to
reassure interested parties (e.g.
through certification) using
OILIntTrade,F/C
Ensure controls are in place to
prevent the spreading of
contamination (using OILV, as
appropriate)
Give instructions for proper
management of human and
animal remains with actual or

-

-

-

As the time allows, assess the
radiological and nonradiological situation to ensure
the strategy in place remains
justified and optimized at all
time. Use the reference level to
assess residual doses when
considering any adaptation

-

-

urgent response phase can be
adapted or lifted

Other considerations

170

Phase

Protective actions

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement

Assess received doses, when
appropriate, to decide on the
course of medical actions
Initiate establishment of a
registry for all those who have
been or are to be identified
requiring longer term medical
follow up
Initiate assessment of the
disruption of normal living
conditions and of the losses
(i.e. economic impact) due to
the emergency and the
emergency response actions
Initiate activities for proper
waste management
Initiate assessment of the
needs of affected populations
in terms of mental health and
psychosocial support as well
as medical follow-up in the
longer term
Initiate assessment of the
needs for longer term
monitoring of residual
contamination in the
environment
Initiate analysis of the

-

-

-

-

-

-

possible contamination

Other considerations

171

Take remedial actions to
progressively reduce
residual doses
Establish a registry for all
those who have been
identified requiring longer
term medical follow up
Ensure access control is in
place including delineation
of areas and implementation
of administrative measures,
as appropriate
Provide medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
affected population
Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed
Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers

−

−

-

−

−

−

-

Transition
phase

Adaptation of protective
actions imposed during
the urgent and early
response phases

Other response actions

Protective actions

Phase

In line with
Tables I-8
and I-9

Basis

Weeks to
months

Time to
implement

Characterize the overall
situation to identify the course
of actions to prepare for
resuming normal social and
economic activity and to
provide for the well-being of
affected populations
Use monitoring results against
OILs such as OILT and
associated considerations to
determine which protective
actions can be adapted or lifted
As the time allows, assess the
radiological and nonradiological situation to ensure
the strategy in place remains
justified and optimized at all
time. Assess effectiveness of
the strategy using the reference
level and prerequisites for the
transition
Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media

-

-

-

-

emergency and emergency
response

Other considerations

172

Phase

Protective actions
Protect members from the
public volunteering in the
emergency response as
helpers in an emergency
Take actions for restoration
of infrastructure, workplaces
and public services
necessary to support normal
living conditions in the
affected areas
Take actions for proper
waste management

−

−

−

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement

Provide advice on useful selfhelp actions
Ensure control is in place to
ensure all trade meets
international standards and to
reassure interested parties (e.g.
through certification) using
OILIntTrade,F/C
Ensure controls are in place to
prevent the spreading of
contamination (using OILV, as
appropriate)
Assess received doses, as
appropriate, to decide on the
course of medical actions
Initiate the change or transfer
of the authority and
responsibilities from the
emergency response
organization to organizations
responsible for the long term
recovery operations
Initiate development of a long
term monitoring strategy in

-

-

−

−

−

(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise

Other considerations

173

Phase

Protective actions

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement

Organize the sharing of any
information and data that were
gathered during the emergency
and that are relevant for long
term planning among the
relevant organizations and
authorities
Develop a programme for
longer term medical follow-up
for the individuals in the
registry
Develop a strategy for mental
health and psychosocial
support for the affected
population
Consider the needs for
compensation of victims for
damage due to the emergency
and for any state support

−

−

−

−

relation to residual
contamination

Other considerations

174

-

-

-

Urgent
response
phase
Provide emergency services
and support on the site
Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers
Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed

Other response actions

Shelter the population
within PAZ, if
appropriate and give
instructions for reducing
inadvertent ingestion
Instruct preparations be
made to protect the food
chain and drinking water
supplies from getting
contaminated within
ICPD (e.g. place grazing
animals on protected feed,
disconnect rainwater
collection pipes and cover
open sources of drinking
water) should this become
necessary;
Instruct preparations be
made to protect relevant
non-food commodities
from getting
contaminated within
ICPD

Protective actions

Phase
Notification
on the
declaration
of Site area
emergency

Basis
Hours to
days

Time to
implement
Take sheltering precautionary
to help taking effectively the
protection strategy in case the
situation escalates to General
emergency
Give clear instructions for
population to follow official
information and any
recommendations should it
become necessary, particularly
within PAZ and UPZ
Increase readiness off-site to
take emergency response
actions in line with those
elaborated in Table I-10
should the situation escalates
in General emergency
Do not delay provision of
medical treatment to anyone in
need irrespective of the
presence of contamination
(including those presenting
symptoms of radiation
overexposure)
Provide support to those
sheltered for access to
essentials and medicines, if

-

-

-

-

-

Other considerations

TABLE I-11. SUITE OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTIONS AND ASSOCIATED CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE SECOND GROUP OF
EMERGENCY SCENARIOS

175

Phase

Protective actions

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement

Lift sheltering after a day to
two days by substituting with
evacuation (should the
situation escalates to General
emergency) or allowing for
partial/fully lifting
Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise
Alert hospitals and medical
staff to prepare to treat
contaminated and exposed
individuals
Deploy monitoring teams in
the PAZ and UPZ to confirm
that no off-site emergency
response actions need to be
taken
If appropriate, ensure controls
are in place to prevent the
spreading of contamination
off-site

-

-

-

-

-

this becomes necessary

Other considerations

176

Protective actions

None

Phase

Urgent
response
phase

-

-

Notification
on the
declaration
of Facility
emergency

-

Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed

Provide emergency services
and support on the site, as
needed
Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers

Basis

Other response actions
Hours to
days

Time to
implement
Give clear instructions for
population to follow official
information and any
recommendations, as needed
Increase readiness off-site to
take emergency response
actions should the situation
escalates in Site area or
General emergency
Do not delay provision of
medical treatment to anyone in
need irrespective of the
presence of contamination
(including those presenting
symptoms of radiation
overexposure)
Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise
Alert hospitals and medical
staff to prepare to treat
contaminated and exposed
individuals
Deploy monitoring teams in
the vicinity to the facility/site
to confirm that no off-site

-

-

-

-

-

-

Other considerations

177

Protective actions

Adapt any protective
action imposed during the
urgent response phase

Reconsider any
instructions to prepare for
taking protective actions
that have been given

−

−

Phase

Early
response
phase

Basis

In line with
Tables I-8
and I-9

Other response actions

Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed
Take medical actions for
those exposed in the
emergency, as appropriate

-

-

Days

Time to
implement

Use monitoring results against
OILs and associated
considerations in Table I-9 to
adapt protective actions and
revoke instructions given
Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise
Ensure controls are in place to
prevent the spreading of
contamination off-site (using
OILV, as appropriate)
Take medical actions for those
involved in the emergency or
the response on-site/at the
facility on the basis of
OIL4/OIL8 and, when
assessed, the received doses

-

-

-

If appropriate, ensure controls
are in place to prevent the
spreading of contamination
off-site (using OILV, as
appropriate)

-

-

emergency response actions
need to be taken

Other considerations

178

Protective actions

None

Phase

Transition
phase

Establish a registry for all
those (if any) who have been
identified requiring longer
term medical follow up
Provide medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
overexposed individuals, if
any
Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed

−

−

−

Other response actions

In line with
Tables I-8
and I-9

Basis

Weeks to
months

Time to
implement
Initiate establishment of a
registry for all those who have
been or are to be identified
requiring longer term medical
follow up, if this is necessary
Initiate analysis of the
emergency and emergency
response
Assess the situation for safe
and secure conduct of the
practice
Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise
Ensure controls are in place to
prevent the spreading of
contamination (using OILV, as
appropriate)
Assess received doses, as
appropriate, to decide on the
course of medical actions
Develop a programme for
longer term medical follow-up
for the individuals in the
registry

-

-

-

-

-

−

−

Other considerations

179

Phase

Protective actions

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement
−

Develop a strategy for mental
health and psychosocial
support for the overexposed
individuals, if any

Other considerations

180

Protect the food chain and
drinking water supplies
from getting
contaminated

Stop the consumption and
distribution of nonessential food and feed
that is potentially or
actually contaminated

Protect relevant non-food
commodities from getting
contaminated

Stop the use and
distribution of nonessential non-food
commodities that are
potentially or actually
contaminated

-

-

-

-

Provide for medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
affected individuals
Keep the public and those
affected, in particular,
informed
Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers

-

-

-

or

If contamination is suspected OIL2
or confirmed, monitor those
who were in the close
proximity to the source of
exposure to identify those
for whom decontamination
and/or medical action may
be needed

Record those who may have
been contaminated or in
close proximity to the source
of exposure

-

Reduce inadvertent
ingestion

-

Time to
implement

Observable
Hours
conditions
given
in
Table I-2

Basis

-

Place access control for the
inner cordoned off area

-

Set up the inner cordoned
off area and evacuate the
area

-

Urgent
response
phase

If appropriate:

Other response actions

Protective actions

Phase

Provide emergency services as
needed
If appropriate, consider
sheltering those in the vicinity
of the inner cordoned off area
if needed to support
emergency response efforts
Give clear instructions
regarding emergency response
actions to concerned parties

-

-

Do not delay provision of
medical treatment to those in
need irrespective of the
presence of contamination
(including those presenting
symptoms of radiation
overexposure)

Give priority to lifesaving
actions and fighting any
immediate non-radiation
related danger/hazard (e.g.
fire)

-

-

Assess overall situation
(including the security) to
ensure safe implementation of
emergency response actions

-

Other considerations

TABLE I-12. SUITE OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE ACTIONS AND ASSOCIATED CONSIDERATIONS FOR THE THIRD GROUP OF
EMERGENCY SCENARIOS

181

Phase

-

Stop international trade of
potentially or actually
contaminated foodstuff
and non-food
commodities

Protective actions

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement

Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise
If appropriate: initiate search
for the source, issue messages
and instructions for public
protection and notification in
case the source is located
Give instructions for proper
management of human and
animal remains with actual or
possible contamination, as
appropriate

-

-

-

-

Begin implementing controls
on vehicles, items and other
equipment exiting the affected
areas using OILV to determine
whether they are safe for use
and any need for
decontamination

If contamination is confirmed:

Alert hospitals and medical
staff to prepare to treat
contaminated and/or exposed
individuals

-

Other considerations

182

-

Stop the consumption and

As appropriate, also:

Reduce inadvertent
ingestion

-

Provide for medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
affected individuals from

Register those individuals
from these areas

Relocate population from
the area

-

Place access control

If contamination is confirmed: -

Early
response
phase

Other response actions

Protective actions

Phase

OIL2

Basis

Days to a
week

Time to
implement

Instruct affected population to
decontaminate, if appropriate,
by removing outer clothing
and washing hands and face
Reconsider the size of the
inner cordoned off area based
on monitoring results

-

-

Initiate activities to
characterize the situation well
Issue instructions to those
refusing to relocate
Assess the results from skin
and thyroid monitoring to
decide on the course of
medical action and need for

-

Begin implementation of
controls to ensure all trade
meets international standards
and to reassure interested
parties (e.g. through
certification) using
OILIntTrade,F/C
-

-

As appropriate:

Assess the results from skin
and thyroid monitoring to
decide on the course of
medical action and need for
individual decontamination
using OIL4 and OIL8

-

Other considerations

183

Early
response
phase

Phase

Stop international trade of
potentially or actually
contaminated foodstuff
and non-food
commodities from the
areas

-

Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers

-

-

Stop the consumption and
distribution of non-

Register those who may
have consumed
contaminated foodstuff

Keep the public and affected
individuals, in particular,
informed

-

these areas

Other response actions

If contamination is confirmed: -

Stop the use and
distribution of nonessential non-food
commodities from the
area

-

distribution of nonessential food and feed
from the area

Protective actions

Time to
implement

In case of Days
large areas:

Basis

Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise
Ensure controls are in place
for preventing the spread of
contamination (using OILV, as
appropriate)
Implement controls to ensure
all trade meets international
standards and to reassure
interested parties (e.g. through
certification) using
OILIntTrade,F/C

-

-

-

Provide, as appropriate,
supplies with clean food, milk,
drinking water as well as

Consider if evacuation applied
earlier needs to be substituted
with relocation or can be lifted

-

-

Instruct affected population to
decontaminate, if appropriate,
by removing outer clothing
and washing hands and face

-

individual decontamination
using OIL4 and OIL8

Other considerations

184

Early
response
phase

Phase

Adaptation of protective
actions imposed during the
urgent response phase
Ensure access control is in
place
Provide medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
affected individuals
Keep the public and those

-

-

-

Stop the international
trade of foodstuff and
other goods from areas
with high deposition

-

Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers

Keep the public and affected
populations, in particular,
informed

-

Stop the use and
distribution of nonessential non-food
commodities in areas with
high deposition

OIL3

Provide for medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
affected population from
these areas

-

Time to
implement

and

Table I-9

In line with

OIL5
OIL6

Days to
weeks

In case of Days to
moderate to weeks
small areas:

Basis

Other response actions

-

essential food and feed
(e.g. local produce, wildgrown products, milk
from grazing animal,
rainwater and animal
feed) in areas with high
deposition

Protective actions

Assess the radiological and
non-radiological situation to
ensure the strategy in place
remains justified and
optimized at all times
Use monitoring results against
OILs and associated

-

Ensure controls are in place
for preventing the spread of
contamination (using OILV, as
appropriate)

-

-

Implement controls to ensure
all trade meets international
standards and to reassure
interested parties (e.g. through
certification) using
OILIntTrade,F/C

In case of lack of essential
foodstuff, consider other
protective actions such as
relocating people from the
areas

Consider providing iodine
thyroid blocking in case of
radioiodine contamination if
replacement for essential
food, milk and drinking water
is not immediately available

-

-

-

animal feed

Other considerations

185

Phase

Protective actions

Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers
Protect members from the
public volunteering in the
emergency response, if any,
as helpers in an emergency

-

-

affected, in particular,
informed

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement

Initiate establishment of a
registry for all those who have
been or are to be identified
requiring longer term medical
follow up
Initiate assessment of the
needs of affected individuals
in terms of mental health and
psychosocial support as well
as medical follow-up in the
longer term
Initiate analysis of the
emergency and emergency
response

-

-

-

been

Assess received doses, when
appropriate, to decide on the
course of medical actions

-

If
contamination
has
confirmed, as appropriate:

Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise

-

considerations to determine
which protective actions can
be adapted or lifted

Other considerations

186

Phase

Protective actions

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement

Ensure controls are in place to
prevent the spreading of
contamination (using OILV, as
appropriate)
Initiate assessment of the
needs for longer term
monitoring of residual
contamination in the
environment
Initiate assessment of the
disruption of normal living
conditions and of the losses
(i.e. economic impact) due to
the emergency and the
emergency response actions
Initiate activities for proper
waste management

-

-

-

-

Initiate planning for source
recovery
Consider measures to be

-

If it has been confirmed that the
integrity of the source has not been
compromised:

Ensure control is in place to
ensure all trade meets
international standards and to
reassure interested parties (e.g.
through certification) using
OILIntTrade,F/C

-

Other considerations

187

Protect members from the
public volunteering in the
emergency response, if any,
as helpers in an emergency

−

Ensure access control is in

Assess received doses, as
appropriate, to decide on the

Provide advice on useful selfhelp actions

Monitor the actions of the
public, others and the media
(including web sites and social
media) to identify and address
inappropriate responses being
taken and address new
concerns that may arise

-

-

Protect all those engaged in
the emergency response as
emergency workers

−

Use monitoring results against
OILs such as OILT and
associated considerations to
determine which protective
actions can be adapted or lifted

-

−

Keep the public and affected
individuals, in particular,
informed

−

Assess the overall situation to
identify to ensure the strategy
is justified and optimized and
to determine the course of
actions to prepare for resuming
normal social and economic
activity

-

fulfilled for safe and secure
handling of the source

Other considerations

-

Provide medical care and
mental health and
psychosocial support to
affected individuals

−

Time to
implement

In line with Days to
Tables I-8 weeks
and I-9

Basis

If contamination has been
confirmed, as appropriate:

Establish a registry for all
those who have been
identified requiring longer
term medical follow up

−

-

Transition
phase

Adaptation of protective
actions imposed during
the urgent and early
response phases

Other response actions

Protective actions

Phase

188

Phase

Protective actions

Take actions for restoration
of infrastructure, workplaces
and public services
necessary to support normal
living conditions in the
affected areas, as appropriate
Take actions for proper
waste management

−

−

Take actions to recover the
source
Take actions to ensure safe
and secure handling of the
source within the framework
of a planned exposure
situation

−
−

If it has been confirmed that the
integrity of the source has not
been compromised:

Take remedial actions to
progressively reduce
residual doses

−

place, as appropriate

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement

Develop a programme for
longer term medical follow-up
for the individuals in the
registry
Develop a strategy for mental
health and psychosocial
support for the affected
individuals
Consider the needs for
compensation of victims for
damage due to the emergency
and for any state support

-

-

-

been

Organize the sharing of any
information and data that were
gathered during the emergency
and that are relevant for long
term planning among the
relevant organizations and
authorities

-

If
contamination
has
confirmed, as appropriate:

Initiate the change or transfer
of the authority and
responsibilities from the
emergency response
organization to organizations
responsible for the recovery
operations

-

course of medical actions

Other considerations

189

Phase

Protective actions

Other response actions

Basis

Time to
implement
Ensure control is in place to
ensure all trade meets
international standards and to
reassure interested parties (e.g.
through certification) using
OILIntTrade,F/C
Ensure controls are in place to
prevent the spreading of
contamination (using OILV, as
appropriate)
Initiate development of a long
term monitoring strategy in
relation to residual
contamination

-

-

-

Other considerations

In order to enable effective consultation in the course of the emergency response, every effort
has been made to identify the interested parties to be consulted and the areas of their interest,
as well as to agree the means for their consultation. They are presented in Table I-13,
notwithstanding the need to closely monitor news and media in an emergency response so that
additional topics of interest be identified along with the associated interested parties to be
engaged and consulted in the course of the actual emergency.
TABLE I-13. LIST OF INTERESTED PARTIES, PRIMARY AREAS OF INTEREST AND
MEANS OF CONSULTATION DURING DIFFERENT EMERGENCY PHASES
WHEN

WHO

PRIMARY INTERESTS

HOW

Urgent response
phase

Nobody

-

No interaction

Local authorities
such as […]

Defining and implementing
necessary protective actions for
relevant populations and areas

Videoconferences

Selected
representatives of
critical sectors
(education,
agriculture,
hospitals, prisons,
[…]) as following
[…]

Ensuring that the needs of
special groups of the population
are addressed in adapting the
protection strategy to the
specific conditions of the
emergency

Through the national or regional
authorities in charge of the
sector (e.g. ministry of
education, agriculture, public
health, justice) as following […]

[…]

[…]

[…]

Early response
phase

Communities,
associations,
Identification of activities
representatives of
necessary for the recovery of
trade and industry as economic activity
following […]

Individual or small groups
hearings (only representatives)
such as […]

Authorities in
neighbouring States
as following […]

Continuing coordination
regarding adaptation of
protection strategy (e.g. return
of evacuees)

Audio- and videoconferences,
exchange of liaison officers as
following […]

Authorities in any
State such as […]

Continuing coordination
regarding criteria and means
used to control the import and
export of foods and
commodities affected by the
emergency

Audio- and videoconferences,
response to enquiries organized
on international web platforms,
international working groups as
following […]

General public

Means of protection, including
following termination of the
emergency

Monitoring of the media,
information requests to call
centres, through local
authorities as following […]

[…]

[…]

[…]

Transition phase

190

Liaisons officers

Inputs obtained during the consultation process need to be carefully studied and considered,
as appropriate, in the decisions made by the responsible decision making body. Various
options need to be carefully analyzed so that concerns are adequately addressed, and selected
options need to be justified. If some contributions to the process are not explicitly retained,
for example because of a lack of justification, feasibility, resources or conflicting interests, the
inputs and the rationale for not retaining them need to be documented. How the inputs have
been reflected in the decisions made would need to be clearly explained to interested parties.
Once the process has been concluded as such, the decisions would be put in practice and their
impact assessed, so as to identify if anything else would need to be done and consultation
arranged accordingly. A scheme of the consultation process during the emergency response is
presented in Fig. I-7.

FIG. I-7. The consultation process during the emergency response.
6. PROTECTION STRATEGY FOR EMERGENCY WORKERS AND HELPERS
6.1 Emergency workers and helpers
Any person engaged as a worker in response to the nuclear or radiological emergency at any
time between the onset of the emergency and its termination is to be considered as an
emergency worker and to be protected accordingly. Emergency workers are relevant
personnel from the response organizations and services, such as response managers, rescuers,
firefighters, drivers and crews of evacuation vehicles, medical personnel, law enforcement
personnel, members of monitoring teams, members of decontamination teams, workers
engaged in activities such as restoration of essential infrastructure and the management of
waste generated in the emergency as well as relevant personnel engaged in providing support
and care to the affected population (e.g. in reception centres) and relevant personnel of
operating organizations (those employed directly by the operating organization and those
engaged indirectly through a contractor). Responsibility for their protection lies with the
employers who need to ensure that the respective emergency workers are identified and
designated as such at the preparedness stage. However, it is recognized that during the
emergency response, emergency workers who have not be identified and designated as such
might be needed to respond to the situation for whatever reason. Such undesignated
emergency workers need to be protected as well and the responsibility to do so lies with a
designated organization for this purpose at the preparedness stage.
Any member of the public who willingly and voluntarily helps in the response to a nuclear or
radiological emergency, despite the fact that (s)he could be exposed to radiation, is to be
considered as a helper in the emergency and to be protected as such. Helpers are members of
the public who are willingly and voluntarily helping in activities such as those aimed at
restoring the essential infrastructure or management of conventional waste in order to support
efforts for resuming normality in the affected areas. The responsibility for their protection lies
with a designated organization for this purpose at the preparedness stage as for undesignated
emergency workers.
191

6.2 Dose restrictions for emergency workers and helpers
National requirements for occupational exposure in planned exposure situations, including the
occupational dose limits, established in […] need to be applied for emergency workers and
helpers in an emergency, on the basis of a graded approach. Exception of this rule are
emergency workers involved voluntarily (presented in a form of informed consent following
information being given on associated risks) in taking the following actions as considered in
this strategy:
 Actions to save human life or prevent serious injury;
 Actions to prevent severe deterministic effects or prevent the development of

catastrophic conditions that could significantly affect people and the environment; or
 Actions to avert a large collective dose.

Namely, actions to save lives, prevent severe deterministic effects or avert the development of
catastrophic conditions that could significantly affect people and the environment are typical
during the urgent response phase of a nuclear or radiological emergency. These actions would
likely be carried out while there is still a scarcity of information about the radiological
situation where the action is to be performed and the uncertainties are large. Because of the
urgency associated with implementing these actions and their importance for effective
implementation of the protection strategy, detailed planning of the work of emergency
workers might not be possible; thus, exposures exceeding the dose limits for occupational
radiation protection in planned exposure situations are justified to ensure the net benefit of the
overall response efforts.
Actions to avert a large collective dose, i.e. actions taken to reduce the risk of stochastic
effects as foreseen in this strategy, may extend through the early response phase and into the
transition phase of an emergency, depending on the range of activities needed to allow the
timely resumption of social and economic activity. As the knowledge and understanding of
the situation where the work needs to be done increases in the early response phase and,
particularly, in the transition phase and there is no need to take urgent decisions on the
deployment of workers, it is possible to implement more planning for efficient protection of
emergency workers and helpers. Thus, any work would need to be done with account taken of
information as it becomes available and planned accordingly, without jeopardizing the
effectiveness of the protection strategy. This approach is expected to allow employers and the
designated organization(s) to apply more stringently the requirements for occupational
radiation protection for planned exposure situations, including the application of dose limits
for occupational exposure, to emergency workers and helpers particularly during the
transition phase.
For those tasks for which complying with occupational dose limits is not possible, the
guidance values given in Table I-14 are to be applied for restricting the exposures of
emergency workers. Dose restrictions to be applied for helpers are also given in Table I-14.
Female emergency workers, who are or might be pregnant, need to be excluded from taking
actions, particularly during the urgent response phase, such as those to avert a large collective
dose, if these actions could result in an equivalent dose to the embryo or fetus exceeding 50
mSv for the full period of in utero development. For those activities to be carried out in
accordance with the requirements for occupational radiation protection during a planned
exposure situation, the working conditions for female workers who are pregnant or suspect
that they are pregnant or who are breast-feeding need to afford the same broad level of
protection to the embryo or fetus or the breastfed infant as that required for members of the
public in a planned exposure situation established in […].

192

TABLE I-14. DOSE RESTRICTIONS FOR EMERGENCY WORKERS AND HELPERS
Guidance value *
Task
Hp(10) **

E ***

ADT +

Emergency workers
<500 mSv

Lifesaving actions

Actions to prevent severe deterministic effects and actions to
prevent the development of catastrophic conditions that
could significantly affect people and the environment

<500 mSv

<ADT, Table I-4 ++

This value may be exceeded — with due consideration
of the generic criteria in Table I-4 — under
circumstances in which the expected benefits to others
clearly outweigh the emergency worker’s own health
risks, and the emergency worker volunteers to take the
action and understands and accepts these health risks

<500 mSv

<500 mSv

< ADT, Table I-4 ++

Actions to avert a large collective dose, such as:
- Actions to keep the affected facility or source stable
- Monitoring (environmental, source, individual)

<100 mSv

<100 mSv

< ADT, Table I-4 ++

Other activities, such as:
- Remedial actions including decontamination on the site and
off the site
- Repair of the affected facility and restoration of the relevant
essential infrastructure
- Management of radioactive waste and conventional waste
- Environmental, source and individual monitoring
- Medical management of contaminated patients

Dose limits for occupational exposure in planned
exposure situations established in […]

- Implementation of corrective actions
Helpers
Specified activities in the national arrangements, such as:
- Restoring essential infrastructure (e.g. roads, public
transportation networks)
- Management of conventional waste
*

**
***
+
++

E ***
≤50 mSv

These values apply to:
(a) The dose from external exposure to strongly penetrating radiation for Hp(10). Doses from external exposure to
weakly penetrating radiation and from intake or skin contamination need to be prevented by all possible means. If
prevention is not feasible, the effective dose and the RBE (relative biological effectiveness) weighted absorbed
dose to a tissue or organ have to be limited to minimize the health risk to the individual in line with the risk
associated with the guidance values given here.
(b) The total effective dose (E) and the RBE weighted absorbed dose to a tissue or organ (ADT) via all exposure
pathways (i.e. dose from external exposure and committed dose from intakes), which are to be estimated as early as
possible to enable any further exposure to be restricted as appropriate.
Personal dose equivalent Hp(d), where d = 10 mm.
Effective dose.
RBE weighted absorbed dose to a tissue or organ.
Value of RBE weighted absorbed dose to a tissue or organ given in Table I-4.

6.3 Processes for assessing the situation, decision making and adaptation
Emergency tasks are carried out during the urgent response phase under circumstances that
are characterized by large uncertainties and by a lack of information concerning the actual
193

conditions. Despite this fact, provision of measures and taking actions to protect emergency
workers is of outmost importance as it is the timely implementation of planned precautionary
and urgent protective actions and other response actions considered in the protection strategy.
To allow for effective protection under these circumstances, hazardous conditions that
emergency workers may face when taking necessary emergency tasks need to be assessed as
part of the hazard assessment and addressed in operational arrangements, taking account of
the planned protection strategy. The hazardous conditions need to include radiological as well
as other hazardous conditions (such as fires and chemical hazards) that may be present in
areas where emergency tasks are carried out. Depending on the assessed conditions, measures
and actions to be taken to protect emergency workers during the urgent response phase need
to be planned, even as a precaution, at the preparedness stage. Because of the urgency
associated with implementing the strategy during the urgent response phase, detailed planning
of the work of emergency workers might not be possible in the course of the emergency
response. Therefore, exposures exceeding occupational dose limits are to be expected and
would need to be controlled so that any decision on further involvement of emergency
workers in undertaking emergency tasks involving radiation exposure be restricted, taking
account of the guidance values in Table I-14.
As the situation evolves, the understanding of the conditions in areas where emergency tasks
need to be carried out increases. Moreover, there is no need to take urgent decisions on the
deployment of emergency workers and, as appropriate, helpers in the emergency. Thus, for
the work to be done in the early response phase, planning of the emergency work to a certain
degree becomes feasible without jeopardizing the effectiveness of the protection strategy.
Such situation allows for better protection of emergency workers and, as appropriate, helpers
in the emergency through selection of the measures and actions for their protection according
to the actual conditions to be faced while performing the assigned tasks. Assessment of the
hazardous conditions done at the preparedness stage may still provide useful information in
this process. However, situations can be expected during this phase for which occupational
dose limits can be exceeded and, thus, guidance values in Table I-14 would have to be used
instead.
As the situation is characterized well and the focus of emergency response shifts from public
protection to preparations for resumption of normal social and economic activity, detailed
planning of the emergency work according to actual conditions is feasible. Therefore,
emergency tasks during the transition phase need to be taken only after detailed planning that
takes account of the actual conditions. As a result, the protection of emergency workers and
helpers in the emergency in the transition phase needs to be applied stringently, in accordance
with the requirements for occupational radiation protection for planned exposure situations,
including the application of dose limits for occupational exposure as given in Table I-14.
The process for assessing the situation and making decision on protecting emergency workers
and helpers in a nuclear or radiological emergency as discussed in this section is presented in
Fig. I-8.
The effectiveness of measures and actions taken to protect emergency workers and helpers is
continually assessed against dose restrictions given in Table I-14. In judging the effectiveness
and the need for any adaptation of the measures and actions taken, the actual circumstances
need to be known under which the emergency tasks have been performed in comparison to
what has been expected. To enable this, meticulous and up-to-date records need to be
established and maintained on the assigned tasks, expected conditions, actual conditions faced
which include readings from monitoring instruments, time spent for completion of assigned
tasks and measures and actions taken to protect emergency workers and helpers and, as early
as possible, doses received need to be assessed. Assessment of the need for medical actions,
194

including medical treatment and long term medical follow up for emergency workers and
helpers, is made based on the doses that have been received, taking into account the criteria
given in Section 5 as for any individual.

FIG. I-8. Process for assessing the situation and making decision on protecting
emergency workers and helpers in a nuclear or radiological emergency.
Finally, the doses (to be) received by emergency workers and helpers and associated risks
need to be factored into the justification and optimization of the protection strategy both at the
preparedness stage and during the response. They need also to be considered when assessing
the effectiveness of the strategy and any adaptation of the protection strategy to meet the
prevailing conditions as the emergency evolves.
6.4 Protective actions and measures to be implemented
All emergency work needs to be planned such that the protection and safety of emergency
workers and helpers is optimized, with account taken of the characteristics and necessity of
the emergency work to be done to effectively implement the required protection strategy. In
doing so, every effort needs to be made to prevent as far as possible doses from external
exposure to weakly penetrating radiation and from intake or skin contamination.
The following actions and measures have to be implemented to protect emergency workers
and helpers, as appropriate:
 At the preparedness stage:

 Assessing hazardous conditions in which emergency work need to be done;
 On the basis of assessed hazardous conditions:
o Identifying measures and actions to effectively protect against the assessed
hazardous conditions while performing emergency tasks;
o Designing emergency response facilities so that they provide adequate protection
against assessed hazardous conditions in which emergency work needs to be
done;
 Provision of training to designated emergency workers on how to perform
emergency tasks under the expected working conditions and to safely and effectively
implement planned measures and actions for their protection.
195

 During the emergency response, with account taken of assessed hazardous conditions

and any information, as it becomes available:
 Providing adequate personal protective equipment including respiratory protection
when performing emergency work in contaminated areas;
 Iodine thyroid blocking through administering stable iodine agents, if radioiodine is
present;
 Provision of instructions for reducing inadvertent ingestion;
 Registering emergency workers and helpers engaged in the emergency response;
 Recording information necessary for dose assessment and assessment of
effectiveness of measures and actions taken to protect emergency workers and
helpers;
 Providing ‘just-in-time’ training on taking assigned tasks under the actual conditions;
 Providing psychological counselling and continuous medical care during the
emergency response;
 Providing health screening, longer term medical follow-up and counselling aimed at
detecting radiation induced health effects early and treating them effectively;
 Providing of information (e.g. on their families, in case they are affected by the
consequences of the emergency) on regular intervals to help reduce stress among
emergency workers during the emergency response;
 Controlling doses by means of:
o Comprehensively planning the expected work while accounting for the hazardous
conditions to be faced and the time needed to complete the work;
o Continuously monitoring hazardous conditions in which emergency workers and
helpers are to perform their tasks;
o Providing adequate monitoring equipment, which includes personal dosimeters or
use of a team/group dosimeter;
o Assessment of doses (total effective dose and RBE weighted absorbed dose) via
all exposure pathways as early as possible and their recording;
o Restricting further exposures in cases of exceeding the guidance values in Table I10;
 Providing, when appropriate, qualified medical advice to those exposed in the
emergency response regarding incurring further occupational exposure;
 Using equipment for carrying out certain tasks remotely, when and where this is
possible.
In implementing these measures and actions, consideration need to be given to protecting
female workers who are pregnant or suspect that they are pregnant or who are breast-feeding
so that the same broad level of protection to the embryo or fetus or the breastfed infant is
afforded as that required for members of the public in a planned exposure situation.
6.5 Communicating risks and doses to emergency workers and helpers
Risks associated with the exposure of emergency workers and helpers in a nuclear or
radiological emergency, particularly when undertaking actions for which occupational dose
limits can be exceeded, need to be communicated to emergency workers and helpers in a plain
and understandable language with associated health hazards placed in perspective. This will

196

help emergency workers to make informed decision in cases in which their informed consent
is warranted. It will also help to alleviate their concerns and to improve their understanding on
the course of actions being taken for their protection and well-being. Once known, doses that
have been received need likewise to be communicated in a manner that places radiological
health hazards in perspective and associates them with the needed medical actions and their
purpose. When doing so, the system and plain language explanations presented in Table I-14
needs to be used.
TABLE I-15. EXPLANATION OF RADIOLOGICAL HEALTH HAZARDS ASSOCIATED
WITH RADIATION EXPOSURES OF EMERGENCY WORKERS AND HELPERS
Type of
exposure

Radiological
health
hazards

Plain language
explanation of the
health hazards

Associated medical
actions

Communicating
associated risks

High
doses and
high dose
rates that
could
result in
criteria in
Table I-4
to be
exceeded

Dangerous to
health

If emergency worker
has been exposed at
these levels,
developing a serious
injury or physical
harm due to radiation
exposure that is life
threatening or that
could reduce the
quality of life is
possible

Emergency workers
exposed at these levels
are provided with
medical examination
and screening that is
followed by medical
treatment, as
necessary, including
longer term medical
follow up.
Psychological support
needs also be provided

Any explanation
made on the
projected health
effects among
emergency workers
need to be clearly
explained and
related to the course
of medical actions
being taken

Moderate
doses and
dose rates
that could
result in
criteria
for
received
doses in
Table I-5
be
exceeded

Possible
health effects
resulting
from
radiation
exposure

Observing an increase
in the frequency of
radiation induced
cancers among
emergency workers is
possible but attributing
any individual case of
cancer as being due to
radiation exposure is
not possible

Emergency workers
exposed at these levels
are provided with
longer term medical
follow-up with the aim
of ensuring that
radiation induced
cancers in an
individual are detected
early and that they are
treated effectively

When projections
are made of
numbers of health
effects among
emergency workers,
the meaning of the
numbers should be
clearly explained
and related to the
objective of the
longer term medical
follow- up

Low dose
and dose
rates
below the
criteria in
Tables I4 and I-5

No
observable
health effects
resulting
from
radiation
exposure

No increase in the
frequency of radiation
induced cancers in a
large population is
observed, and no
individual case of
cancer can be
attributed as being due
to radiation exposure

No medical attention
in relation to radiation
induced health effects
is warranted in such
cases

Projections of
hypothetical
numbers of health
effects among
emergency workers
and helpers in such
cases, made for
whatever reason,
should not be used
in public
communication on
radiological health
hazards

197

7. SPECIFIC CONSIDERATIONS
Effective implementation of the protection strategy depends on how the information and data
necessary for prompt decision making, as foreseen in this document, can be obtained in the
course of an emergency response and how priorities for other activities to be carried out in the
emergency response are formulated in support of the strategy’s goals. Therefore, priorities in
carrying out various activities in an emergency response such as in managing and directing
the emergency response, monitoring and assessment, public communications, waste
management […] would need to be set in such a manner that they support an effective
implementation of the protection strategy.
7.1 Management
The protection strategy serves as the main policy document on which basis the emergency
management system is designed pertaining the objectives in emergency preparedness and
response it aims to achieve in an efficient and effective manner. Organizational structure and
processes of the system need to be formulated so as to allow inclusion of all relevant
participants with any responsibility of implementing or supporting the implementation of the
protection strategy as well as to enable developing, at the preparedness stage, consistent,
transparent and effective operational arrangements across various participants in the
emergency management system. This includes processes for sharing on information on […],
coordinating actions on […], communicating on aspects such as […], cross-border
coordination in relation to […], […]. In addition, processes for regular review and for
initiating revision to existing operational arrangements, consultation and coordination in
doing so as well as for supervising the implementation of the protection strategy in the
operational arrangements and associated verification and enforcement measures need to be
part of the system.
Exercises and training programmes involving all the participants is essential in ensuring the
readiness of the system to be activated promptly in a nuclear and radiological emergency and
to fulfil effectively its functions. Technical, human and other necessary resources need to be
allocated accordingly with account taken of the level of response needed to effectively
implement the protection strategy if an emergency happens.
Moreover, the unified command and control system to be used to manage and direct the
emergency response efforts should comprise of processes that follow the various processes for
decision making and assessment as elaborated in the protection strategy and, thus, should be
fed with the necessary information in support of its functions. The following specific
considerations for the emergency management system at the national level are implicated by
this strategy: […]
Finally, the emergency management system needs to be structured in a manner to allow for
information essential for the emergency, the emergency response and their analysis as well as
for the long term management of the situation, when this is appropriate, to be recorded and
shared among relevant participants in the emergency management system.
7.2 Radiation monitoring and assessment
Monitoring activities to be conducted in an emergency response need to support effective
implementation of the protection strategy as planned in this document. However, the
monitoring itself may not be sufficient in providing such support, and further assessments
need to be utilized. The aim is to help authorities and decision making body:
 To better understand the situation as it evolves;
198

 To identify promptly any need for taking public protective actions and other response






actions;
To identify necessary measures and actions to protect emergency workers and helpers;
To determine the course of medical actions required for exposed individuals;
To effectively adapt the protection strategy as the emergency evolves;
To plan for recovery and prepare for resumption of social and economic activity;
To identify when would be appropriate for the emergency to be declared ended.

In the context of this protection strategy, assessment relates to processes and tools applied to:
− Assess the conditions at the facility or plant against EALs or the conditions at a site
against observables and the emergency classification system;
− Assess radiological consequences and needs for protective actions and medical actions
which includes:
o Modelling the dispersion of radioactive releases in the environment;
o Ensuring availability of high quality meteorological data;
o Estimating […]
− Assess non-radiological consequences and need for other response actions which
includes:
o […]
− […]
These processes and tools along with the monitoring play important role in supporting the
decision making at different stages of the emergency response. To enable effective
implementation of the protection strategy they need to be integrated in the overall emergency
arrangements and their use considered in the context of enabling timely and effective decision
making without impairing the emergency response.
The type of measurements, the quantities to be measured, areas and frequency of
measurements in the monitoring strategy including the monitoring instruments are to be
selected in a manner so that the comparison with the OILs given in this document is done
directly and decisions are made accordingly following the established processes. In designing
the monitoring strategy, account need to be taken of the time available for effective decision
making. Considering that the exact areas that may need to be monitored can be wide, such
that the monitoring of the whole area would take significant time for completion with limited
resources available, setting the priorities in the monitoring strategy on areas that should be
monitored first may be supported by decision aiding tools and models, in order to allow for
the effective and efficient use of available (but usually limited) resources and capabilities. For
example, meteorological analyses and forecasts, especially of rainfall, wind and atmospheric
stability data, as well as atmospheric transport modelling, may help to identify areas of
potentially higher deposition. However, the use of such tools and models need to be planned
in the monitoring strategy so that it does not jeopardize the effectiveness of the protection
strategy with monitoring being ultimately conducted in all geographical areas and not just in
those areas indicated by modelling tools.
In addition, assigning priorities for monitoring needs to consider the following aspects:
- The type of the areas themselves (e.g. residential, agricultural or rural), so that priority
for monitoring is assigned focusing on public protection and effective implementation
of the protection strategy rather than characterizing the radiological situation in any
affected area;
- Local food production patterns, local diets and food preferences;
- […].
199

Taking into account these aspects and the suite of emergency response actions given in
Section 5, the following implications for the monitoring strategy have been derived from the
planned protection strategy:
- For the first group of emergency scenarios:
o Urgent response phase, following identification of plant conditions indicative of an
emergency:
 Rapidly assess the observed conditions and plant parameters comprising of […]
against EALs given in […] to determine if EALs indicating General emergency
are met so that the required level of emergency response is activated following
declaration;
 […]
o Urgent response phase, following release:
 Rapidly measure external gamma dose rates due to ground deposition in areas
beyond UPZ where OIL1 is expected to be exceeded so that urgent decisions are
made on evacuation of affected population within hours. Such areas relate to […]
and are shown on Figure […] in Appendix 1. In order to ensure that reliable
measurements are available timely, the order of coverage with monitoring of
different sectors in these areas is done on the basis of […] as following […]. In
deciding this approach, the following is considered: […]
 […]
- For the second group of emergency scenarios:
o […]
- For the third group of emergency scenarios:
o […]
The interpretation of monitoring data, products of assessment and their consideration in the
decision making need to account for the uncertainties associated with e.g. measurement
results as they might affect the quality of the decision making process. Depending on the
origin of the uncertainties, efforts need to be made to reduce them to the extent practicable by:
[…]. The uncertainties are considered in the decision making process through […].
Members of the monitoring teams are to be designated as emergency workers and protected as
such in line with Section 6. In justifying the emergency tasks to be carried out by the
monitoring teams at a given time, the doses to be received by its members and associated
risks need to be considered against the benefits of the monitoring.
7.3 Public communication
Keeping the public informed is one of the emergency response actions that is applied as part
of this strategy at any stage and for any type of emergency scenario. Effective public
communication is important aspect of the emergency response that supports, to a great extent,
efficient implementation of the protection strategy, alleviating public concerns and reducing
actions being taken that are not warranted. To enable this, the communication strategy need to
be designed in a manner that helps authorities and decision making body deliver clear and
understandable messages to the general public and, in particular, affected populations on the
emergency itself as well as on the recommended emergency response actions (particularly in
terms of what is to be applied, where and for whom the decisions apply) and associated
considerations.

200

In the communication strategy, the objectives, target audience, the most effective
communication activities, information products and tools as well as the channels through
which messages will be communicated need to be determined and selected in a manner so that
they support effective implementation of the protection strategy, with due consideration being
given on the time allowing to do so.
The following implications for the public communication strategy have been derived from the
planned protection strategy:
- For the first group of emergency scenarios:
o Urgent response phase, upon declaration of General emergency:
 Alert the public from the emergency planning zones and distances and warn them
on the on-going situation while providing clear instructions on the emergency
response actions being recommended for them through […]
 […]
- For the second group of emergency scenarios:
o […]
- For the third group of emergency scenarios:
o […]
Effective communication during the response largely depends on the communication
exercised at the preparedness stage and the trust built with the targeted audience. To enable
effective communication during the response, the following information needs to be
communicated at the preparedness stage: […]
8. IMPLEMENTING THE
ARRANGEMENTS

PROTECTION

STRATEGY IN OPERATIONAL

The protection strategy elaborated in this document is implemented, should a nuclear or
radiological emergency happen, through execution of operational arrangements such as plans
and procedures of responsible response organizations. Therefore, all relevant organizations
(listed at the beginning of this strategy) with roles and responsibilities in emergency
preparedness and response need to ensure that all operational arrangements under their
responsibility are developed or updated in a manner and are tested to ensure the effective
implementation of the protection strategy in an emergency response concerning not only the
protection of the public but also the protection of relevant emergency workers and helpers in
the emergency.
The process of putting in place consistent and complementary operational arrangements in
line with the protection strategy elaborated in this document is to be coordinated by […]
through the dedicated processes of the emergency management system comprising of […].
This process is to be completed by […] and the appropriateness of the operational
arrangements is to be tested in exercises on a regular basis. Any revision of the operational
arrangements following this period would need to be transparent in terms of the revisions
needed and the rationale for the revisions and their implications for the arrangements of other
organizations and the implementation of the planned protection strategy to be assessed and
made know to all participants of the emergency management system. Ensuring the
effectiveness of revised arrangements in implementing the planned protection strategy and
coordinating any associated revisions needs to be done through […].

201

Taking into account the fact that the protection strategy elaborated in this document does not
cover in details the strategy for on-site response as the latter is facility- and site-specific, the
operating organizations are responsible in ensuring that the strategy for on-site response is
consistent with this protection strategy. This is verified and enforced through the regulatory
processes of […].
APPENDIX I: Maps with location of facilities in EPCs I and II and associated areas of
emergency planning zones and distances
[…]
APPENDIX II: Operational Intervention Levels
[…]
APPENDICES (AS NEEDED)
[…]
REFERENCES
[…]
ANNEXES (AS NEEDED)
[…]

202

REFERENCES TO ANNEX I
[I‒1]

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, IAEA Safety Glossary:
Terminology Used in Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection, 2018 Edition,
IAEA, Vienna (2019).

[I‒2]

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL CIVIL
AVIATION
ORGANIZATION,
INTERNATIONAL
LABOUR
ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION,
INTERPOL, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, PREPARATORY COMMISSION FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR-TEST-BAN TREATY ORGANIZATION,
UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, UNITED NATIONS
OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS,
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD METEOROLOGICAL
ORGANIZATION, Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or Radiological
Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 7, IAEA, Vienna (2015).

[I‒3]

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL CIVIL
AVIATION ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, INTERPOL, OECD
NUCLEAR ENERGY AGENCY, UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR THE
COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS, WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION,
WORLD
METEOROLOGICAL
ORGANIZATION,
Arrangements for the Termination of a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency, IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. GSG-11, IAEA, Vienna (2018).

203

ANNEX II
FACTORS FOR JUSTIFCATION AND OPTIMIZATION
Many factors, listed in Table II-1 of the basis of GSG-11 [II‒1], influence the choice of
protective actions and other response actions within a protection strategy for a nuclear or
radiological emergency. For each of these factors, different organizations and bodies may
contribute to the decision making processes. The table below lists a number of these factors to
help emergency planners and decision makers in identifying the organizations and relevant
interested parties that need to be prepared to contribute to, and need to be involved in, the
development and implementation of justified and optimized protection strategies.
TABLE II-1: COMPILATION OF FACTORS FOR CONSIDERATION IN THE
JUSTIFICATION AND OPTIMIZATION OF THE PROTECTION STRATEGY
Factors
General goals






Goals of emergency response
Primary objective for the termination of an emergency
Primary prerequisites for the termination of the emergency
Specific prerequisites for the termination of the emergency

Legislation and
regulations



Criteria for implementing protective actions and other response
actions
Reference level for emergency exposure situation
Generic criteria
Operational criteria (OILs, EALs, observables)
Measures for protecting emergency workers, including guideline
values for restricting their exposures in emergency response
Other respective requirements and guidance for:
o Planned, emergency and existing exposure situations
o Commitments under relevant international instruments, bi-lateral
and multilateral agreements in relation to transnational and/or
transboundary emergencies







Nature of the
emergency
exposure
situation







Radionuclides involved, activities and associated hazards
Expected evolution of the situation
Location and size of the affected area
Number of exposed people
Emergency response actions implemented during the urgent and
early phases

Radiation
protection





Radiological situation
Exposure scenario and dominant exposure pathways
Contamination of living environment (dose rates, surface activity
concentrations, activity concentrations in samples)
Contamination of food, milk and drinking water
Contamination of non-food commodities



204

Timing






Dose to the public (projected dose, received dose, residual dose)
Dose to the emergency workers and helpers
Radiation induced health effects
Need for medical follow-up



Urgency associated with implementation of effective protective
actions
Time needed for the implementation of protective actions
Duration of protective actions
Timescale over which doses will be and/or are received




Efficiency







Resources










Environmental
aspects






Economic aspects 

Availability of human resources
Knowledge, skill and training needs
Availability of material (trucks, busses, machinery etc.)
Availability of financial resources
Availability of stable iodine tablets
Availability of chemicals and other means/resources for
decontamination and decorporation
Availability of infrastructures (e.g. for the relocation of people, for
waste treatment, storage and disposal, for land use reconversion and
change in industrial processes)
Availability of logistical support
Type of affected area: urban, recreational, industrial, agricultural,
forest, etc.
Type of surfaces: buildings, roads, agricultural or forest soil
Geographical location of area (e.g. coast, mountain) and geology
Indirect effects (e.g. use of land for other purposes)





Direct costs associated with the implementation of emergency
response actions
Indirect costs associated with impacts from consequences of the
emergency
Compensation issues
Interruptions in international trade
Expected market response and evolution in the future




Disrupted living conditions
Reduction in life expectancy due to stress associated with



Social and ethical
aspects

Feasibility of actions (season of the year, weather conditions, etc.)
Reducing exposure and contamination in consideration of pre-set
reference level
Limitations (technical, social, environmental, economic)
Acceptability of protective actions
Interaction between different actions

205






Waste
management






resettlement
Psycho-social effects
Possibility of public self-help
Feedback from interested parties on their concerns
Socioeconomic aspects, including issues associated with public trust
and credibility of authorities
Need for routine public services (e.g. transport, shops, medical care,
education)
Production of radioactive waste and its relation to emergency
response actions
Type of waste and options for its characterization
Options for pre-disposal management and for minimizing amount of
waste
Available waste management facilities and practices

REFERENCES TO ANNEX II
[II‒1]

206

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL CIVIL
AVIATION ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, INTERPOL, OECD
NUCLEAR ENERGY AGENCY, UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR THE
COORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS, WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION,
WORLD
METEOROLOGICAL
ORGANIZATION,
Arrangements for the Termination of a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency, IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. GSG-11, IAEA, Vienna (2018).

ABBREVIATIONS
ALARA

as low as reasonably achievable

EAL

emergency action level

EPC

emergency preparedness category

EPD

extended planning distance

EPR

emergency preparedness and response

ICPD

ingestion and commodities planning distance

ICRP

International Commission on Radiation Protection

ITB

iodine thyroid blocking

LWR

light water reactor

NPP

nuclear power plant

OIL

operational intervention level

PAZ

precautionary action zone

RBE

relative biological effectiveness

UPZ

urgent protective action planning zone

WHO

World Health Organization

207

CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW
Bergman, L.

Radiation Protection Bureau, Health Canada, Canada

Buglova, E.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Close, L.

Radiation Protection Bureau, Health Canada, Canada

Gering, F.

Federal Office for Radiation Protection, Germany

Grzechnik, M.

Australian Radiation Protection and Nuclear Safety Authority, Australia

Haywood, S.

Department Public Health England, UK

Martincic, R.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Martins, J.O.

Portuguese Environment Agency, Portugal

Motomitsu, K.

Nuclear Regulation Authority, Japan

Nestoroska Madjunarova, S.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Owen, D.

Office for Nuclear Regulation, UK

Rauber, D.

National Emergency Operations Centre, Switzerland

Robinson, C.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Vandecasteele, C.

Federal Agency for Nuclear Control, Belgium

Vilar Welter, P.V.

International Atomic Energy Agency

208

@

No. 26

ORDERING LOCALLY
IAEA priced publications may be purchased from the sources listed below or from major local booksellers.
Orders for unpriced publications should be made directly to the IAEA. The contact details are given at
the end of this list.

NORTH AMERICA
Bernan / Rowman & Littlefield
15250 NBN Way, Blue Ridge Summit, PA 17214, USA
Telephone: +1 800 462 6420 • Fax: +1 800 338 4550
Email: orders@rowman.com • Web site: www.rowman.com/bernan

REST OF WORLD
Please contact your preferred local supplier, or our lead distributor:
Eurospan Group
Gray’s Inn House
127 Clerkenwell Road
London EC1R 5DB
United Kingdom
Trade orders and enquiries:
Telephone: +44 (0)176 760 4972 • Fax: +44 (0)176 760 1640
Email: eurospan@turpin-distribution.com
Individual orders:
www.eurospanbookstore.com/iaea
For further information:
Telephone: +44 (0)207 240 0856 • Fax: +44 (0)207 379 0609
Email: info@eurospangroup.com • Web site: www.eurospangroup.com

Orders for both priced and unpriced publications may be addressed directly to:
Marketing and Sales Unit
International Atomic Energy Agency
Vienna International Centre, PO Box 100, 1400 Vienna, Austria
Telephone: +43 1 2600 22529 or 22530 • Fax: +43 1 26007 22529
Email: sales.publications@iaea.org • Web site: www.iaea.org/publications

21-00546E

21 8 PP = 1 1 . 1 9 M M S PI NE

Considerations in the Development of a Protection Strategy for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency

I N T E R N AT I O N A L AT O M I C E N E R GY AG E N C Y
VIENNA

EPR- PROTECTION
S T R AT E G Y

2020

Considerations in
the Development of
a Protection Strategy
for a Nuclear or
Radiological Emergency

@

E M E R G E N C Y P R E PA R E D N E S S
AND RESPONSE

2020

EPR - PROTECTI ON
S TR ATEGY 2020

EPR- PROTECTION
S T R AT E G Y

