IAEA Safety Standards

Safety through international standards

Yukiya Amano
Director General

IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 7

“Governments, regulatory bodies and operators everywhere must
ensure that nuclear material and radiation sources are used
beneficially, safely and ethically. The IAEA safety standards are
designed to facilitate this, and I encourage all Member States to
make use of them.”

for protecting people and the environment

Preparedness and Response
for a Nuclear or
Radiological Emergency
Jointly sponsored by the
FAO, IAEA, ICAO, ILO, IMO, INTERPOL,
OECD/NEA, PAHO, CTBTO, UNEP, OCHA, WHO, WMO

1
PA H O

WH O

AHO

WHO

General Safety Requirements
No. GSR Part 7
O PS

O MS

O PA S

O MS

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
VIENNA
ISBN 978–92–0–105715–0
ISSN 1020–525X

15-22951_PUB_1708_covers.indd 1-3

2015-11-06 14:09:01

IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS AND RELATED PUBLICATIONS
IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
Under the terms of Article III of its Statute, the IAEA is authorized to establish or adopt
standards of safety for protection of health and minimization of danger to life and property, and
to provide for the application of these standards.
The publications by means of which the IAEA establishes standards are issued in the
IAEA Safety Standards Series. This series covers nuclear safety, radiation safety, transport
safety and waste safety. The publication categories in the series are Safety Fundamentals,
Safety Requirements and Safety Guides.
Information on the IAEA’s safety standards programme is available on the IAEA Internet
site
http://www-ns.iaea.org/standards/
The site provides the texts in English of published and draft safety standards. The texts
of safety standards issued in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish, the IAEA Safety
Glossary and a status report for safety standards under development are also available. For
further information, please contact the IAEA at: Vienna International Centre, PO Box 100,
1400 Vienna, Austria.
All users of IAEA safety standards are invited to inform the IAEA of experience in their
use (e.g. as a basis for national regulations, for safety reviews and for training courses) for the
purpose of ensuring that they continue to meet users’ needs. Information may be provided via
the IAEA Internet site or by post, as above, or by email to Ofﬁcial.Mail@iaea.org.
RELATED PUBLICATIONS
The IAEA provides for the application of the standards and, under the terms of Articles III
and VIII.C of its Statute, makes available and fosters the exchange of information relating
to peaceful nuclear activities and serves as an intermediary among its Member States for this
purpose.
Reports on safety in nuclear activities are issued as Safety Reports, which provide
practical examples and detailed methods that can be used in support of the safety standards.
Other safety related IAEA publications are issued as Emergency Preparedness and
Response publications, Radiological Assessment Reports, the International Nuclear Safety
Group’s INSAG Reports, Technical Reports and TECDOCs. The IAEA also issues reports
on radiological accidents, training manuals and practical manuals, and other special safety
related publications.
Security related publications are issued in the IAEA Nuclear Security Series.
The IAEA Nuclear Energy Series comprises informational publications to encourage
and assist research on, and the development and practical application of, nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. It includes reports and guides on the status of and advances in technology,
and on experience, good practices and practical examples in the areas of nuclear power, the
nuclear fuel cycle, radioactive waste management and decommissioning.

15-22951_PUB_1708_covers.indd 4-6

2015-11-06 14:09:01

PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
FOR A NUCLEAR OR
RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCY

IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS SERIES No. GSR Part 7

PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE
FOR A NUCLEAR OR
RADIOLOGICAL EMERGENCY
GENERAL SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
JOINTLY SPONSORED BY THE:
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION,
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION,
INTERPOL,
OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY AGENCY,
PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION,
PREPARATORY COMMISSION FOR THE
COMPREHENSIVE NUCLEAR-TEST-BAN TREATY ORGANIZATION,
UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME,
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF
HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS,
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION,
WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION
This publication includes a CD-ROM containing the IAEA Safety Glossary:
2007 Edition (2007) and the Fundamental Safety Principles (2006),
each in Arabic, Chinese, English, French, Russian and Spanish versions.
The CD-ROM is also available for purchase separately.
See: http://www-pub.iaea.org/MTCD/publications/publications.asp
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
VIENNA, 2015

COPYRIGHT NOTICE
All IAEA scientific and technical publications are protected by the terms of
the Universal Copyright Convention as adopted in 1952 (Berne) and as revised
in 1972 (Paris). The copyright has since been extended by the World Intellectual
Property Organization (Geneva) to include electronic and virtual intellectual
property. Permission to use whole or parts of texts contained in IAEA publications
in printed or electronic form must be obtained and is usually subject to royalty
agreements. Proposals for non-commercial reproductions and translations are
welcomed and considered on a case-by-case basis. Enquiries should be addressed
to the IAEA Publishing Section at:
Marketing and Sales Unit, Publishing Section
International Atomic Energy Agency
Vienna International Centre
PO Box 100
1400 Vienna, Austria
fax: +43 1 2600 29302
tel.: +43 1 2600 22417
email: sales.publications@iaea.org
http://www.iaea.org/books
© IAEA, 2015
Printed by the IAEA in Austria
November 2015
STI/PUB/1708
https://doi.org/10.61092/iaea.3dbe-055p

IAEA Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
Preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency : general safety
requirements. — Vienna : International Atomic Energy Agency, 2015.
p. ; 24 cm. — (IAEA safety standards series, ISSN 1020–525X ;
no. GSR part 7)
STI/PUB/1708
ISBN 978–92–0–105715–0
Includes bibliographical references.
1. Nuclear accidents — Management. 2. Ionizing radiation — Accidents.
3. Emergency management. I. International Atomic Energy Agency. II. Series.
IAEAL

15–00987

FOREWORD
by Yukiya Amano
Director General
The IAEA’s Statute authorizes the Agency to “establish or adopt…
standards of safety for protection of health and minimization of danger to life and
property” — standards that the IAEA must use in its own operations, and which
States can apply by means of their regulatory provisions for nuclear and radiation
safety. The IAEA does this in consultation with the competent organs of the
United Nations and with the specialized agencies concerned. A comprehensive
set of high quality standards under regular review is a key element of a stable and
sustainable global safety regime, as is the IAEA’s assistance in their application.
The IAEA commenced its safety standards programme in 1958. The
emphasis placed on quality, fitness for purpose and continuous improvement
has led to the widespread use of the IAEA standards throughout the world. The
Safety Standards Series now includes unified Fundamental Safety Principles,
which represent an international consensus on what must constitute a high level
of protection and safety. With the strong support of the Commission on Safety
Standards, the IAEA is working to promote the global acceptance and use of its
standards.
Standards are only effective if they are properly applied in practice.
The IAEA’s safety services encompass design, siting and engineering safety,
operational safety, radiation safety, safe transport of radioactive material and
safe management of radioactive waste, as well as governmental organization,
regulatory matters and safety culture in organizations. These safety services assist
Member States in the application of the standards and enable valuable experience
and insights to be shared.
Regulating safety is a national responsibility, and many States have
decided to adopt the IAEA’s standards for use in their national regulations. For
parties to the various international safety conventions, IAEA standards provide
a consistent, reliable means of ensuring the effective fulfilment of obligations
under the conventions. The standards are also applied by regulatory bodies and
operators around the world to enhance safety in nuclear power generation and in
nuclear applications in medicine, industry, agriculture and research.
Safety is not an end in itself but a prerequisite for the purpose of the
protection of people in all States and of the environment — now and in the
future. The risks associated with ionizing radiation must be assessed and
controlled without unduly limiting the contribution of nuclear energy to equitable
and sustainable development. Governments, regulatory bodies and operators
everywhere must ensure that nuclear material and radiation sources are used
beneficially, safely and ethically. The IAEA safety standards are designed to
facilitate this, and I encourage all Member States to make use of them.

PREFACE
BACKGROUND
Organizations responsible for the management of emergencies (including
conventional emergencies) recognize that good preparedness in advance of
any emergency can substantially improve the emergency response. One of
the most important elements of emergency preparedness is the coordination
of arrangements among the different bodies involved to ensure clear lines of
responsibility and authority.
The Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident (‘Early
Notification Convention’) and the Convention on Assistance in the Case of a
Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency (‘Assistance Convention’), both
adopted in 19861, place specific obligations in relation to a nuclear or radiological
emergency on the States Parties to the Conventions and on the IAEA.
The practical implementation of the various articles of these Conventions,
as well as the fulfilment of certain obligations under Article 16 of the Convention
on Nuclear Safety2 and Article 25 of the Joint Convention on the Safety of Spent
Fuel Management and the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management3, warrants
the establishment of appropriate arrangements for emergency preparedness and
response.
The Inter-Agency Committee on Radiological and Nuclear Emergencies
(IACRNE) has been established as an inter-agency coordination mechanism
to ensure that arrangements for emergency preparedness and response at
the international level are consistent. IACRNE, which comprises relevant
international intergovernmental organizations (hereafter, international
organizations), maintains the Joint Radiation Emergency Management Plan of
the International Organizations. IACRNE also contributes to the development of
consistent international standards on emergency preparedness and response and
to their practical application.

1
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Convention on Early Notification
of a Nuclear Accident and Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or
Radiological Emergency, Legal Series No. 14, IAEA, Vienna (1987).
2
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Convention on Nuclear Safety,
Legal Series No. 16, IAEA, Vienna (1994).
3
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Joint Convention on the Safety of
Spent Fuel Management and the Safety of Radioactive Waste Management, IAEA International
Law Series No. 1, IAEA, Vienna (2006).

In March 2002, the IAEA’s Board of Governors established safety
requirements for preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological
emergency as an IAEA safety standard. The Safety Requirements publication,
Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency
(IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-R-2), was issued in November 2002 with
joint sponsorship by seven international organizations: the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the IAEA, the International Labour
Organization (ILO), the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (OECD/NEA), the
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the World Health
Organization (WHO).
Since its publication in 2002, States have been using the IAEA Safety
Requirements publication No. GS-R-2 in establishing and enhancing their
arrangements for emergency preparedness and response. The 55th General
Conference of the IAEA in 2011, in resolution GC(55)/RES/9, emphasized
“the importance for all Member States to implement emergency preparedness
and response mechanisms and develop mitigation measures at a national
level, consistent with the Agency’s safety standards, for improving emergency
preparedness and response, facilitating communication in an emergency and
contributing to harmonization of national criteria for protective [actions] and
other actions”.
The 56th General Conference of the IAEA in 2012, in resolution
GC(56)/RES/9, requested the IAEA Secretariat, Member States and relevant
international organizations “to address compatibility issues in the development
of national and international emergency response mechanisms and procedures
consistent with the Agency’s safety standards”.
The 59th General Conference of the IAEA in 2015, in resolution GC(59)/
RES/9, emphasized “the importance of the establishment, implementation, regular
exercise and continuous improvement of national emergency preparedness
and response measures, taking into account the IAEA safety standards”, and
encouraged Member States “to strengthen their national, bilateral, regional and
international emergency preparedness and response mechanisms, as appropriate,
to facilitate timely information exchange during a nuclear emergency, and [to]
improve bilateral, regional and international cooperation to that effect”.
REVISION PROCESS FOR THE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
In 2011, the IAEA Secretariat, relevant international organizations and
Member States began the review of IAEA Safety Requirements publication
No. GS-R-2 on the basis of lessons identified in exercises and from the response

to emergencies since its publication in 2002 (including the response to the
accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant in Japan in March 2011),
and in due consideration of recommendations of the International Commission
on Radiological Protection (ICRP).
The revision of IAEA Safety Requirements publication No. GS-R-2
commenced with a series of drafting meetings organized on the basis of thematic
areas, as well as a series of review meetings of IACRNE. Representatives of
IAEA Member States and of relevant international organizations, including
representatives of the Sponsoring Organizations, then considered the draft text at
a technical meeting held in November 2012.
On the basis of recommendations from these meetings, a revised draft text
was prepared and was submitted for a first review by the IAEA Safety Standards
Committees4 and Nuclear Security Guidance Committee in the first half of 2013.
In July 2013, the draft text was submitted for comment to IAEA Member States
and relevant international organizations. On the basis of comments received, a
revised draft text was prepared and submitted for a second review by the Safety
Standards Committees and the Nuclear Security Guidance Committee in the
first half of 2014. The revised draft text was approved by the Safety Standards
Committees and the Nuclear Security Guidance Committee in July 2014 and was
endorsed by the Commission on Safety Standards in November 2014.
At its meeting on 3 March 2015, the Board of Governors of the IAEA
established the draft Safety Requirements (in English) “as an Agency safety
standard — in accordance with Article III.A.6 of the Statute5” and authorized the
Director General “to promulgate these Safety Requirements and to issue them as
a Safety Requirements publication in the IAEA Safety Standards Series”.
The international organizations that had expressed an interest in becoming
sponsoring organizations of the revision of IAEA Safety Requirements
publication No. GS-R-2 and that had actively participated in the revision process
were invited to sponsor the new Safety Requirements publication. By July 2015,
13 international organizations had responded positively to the invitation, having
followed their respective processes for approval or confirmation.

4

Nuclear Safety Standards Committee, Radiation Safety Standards Committee,
Transport Safety Standards Committee and Waste Safety Standards Committee.
5
Statute of the International Atomic Energy Agency, IAEA, Vienna (1990).

The revision of IAEA Safety Requirements publication No. GS-R-2
is hereby issued in the IAEA Safety Standards Series as General Safety
Requirements Part 7 under joint sponsorship by 13 international organizations: the
FAO, the IAEA, the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO), the ILO,
the International Maritime Organization (IMO), INTERPOL, the OECD/NEA,
PAHO, the Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization (CTBTO), the United Nations Environment Programme
(UNEP), OCHA, the WHO and the World Meteorological Organization (WMO).
The IAEA, on behalf of all the Sponsoring Organizations, wishes to express
its great appreciation to all those who assisted in the preparation of this Safety
Requirements publication and in the process of reaching a consensus.
APPLICATION OF THE SAFETY REQUIREMENTS
These safety requirements are binding on the IAEA Secretariat in relation
to its own operations and on Member States in relation to operations assisted by
the IAEA. They are recommended for use by Member States and by national
authorities in relation to their own activities.
The Sponsoring Organizations are committed to continuously improving
emergency preparedness and to coordinating their response to a nuclear or
radiological emergency in line with these safety requirements, their respective
mandates and, as appropriate, the Joint Radiation Emergency Management Plan
of the International Organizations. These safety requirements are to be applied by
the Sponsoring Organizations to their own operations in line with their respective
mandates. States that are member states of the Sponsoring Organizations other
than the IAEA may adopt these safety requirements, at their own discretion, or
in accordance with their membership obligations, for application to their own
activities.
All international organizations, irrespective of whether or not they are
members of IACRNE, are encouraged to consider these safety requirements in
establishing or enhancing their own emergency arrangements.
THE SPONSORING ORGANIZATIONS
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
In 1943, 44 governments committed to founding a permanent organization
for food and agriculture at a meeting in Hot Springs, Virginia, USA. The formal
foundation of the FAO of the United Nations took place at the first session of the

FAO Conference at Chateau Frontenac in Quebec, Canada, in 1945. The FAO
works in partnership with the IAEA and other international organizations through
the Joint FAO/IAEA Division of Nuclear Techniques in Food and Agriculture
in preparing for and responding to nuclear or radiological emergencies in line
with the Joint Radiation Emergency Management Plan of the International
Organizations.
The FAO can provide assistance according to its Constitution6 and as
a Party to the Early Notification and Assistance Conventions and in line with
its strategic objective to increase the resilience of livelihoods to threats and
crises. It collects, analyses, interprets and disseminates information relating to
nutrition, food and agriculture (including fisheries, marine products, and forestry
and primary forestry products). The FAO also promotes and, where appropriate,
recommends national and international action with regard to the improvement
of the processing, marketing and distribution of food and agricultural products
and the adoption of international policies with regard to arrangements concerning
agricultural commodities.
The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
The IAEA was established in 1957. Its statutory objective is to seek to
accelerate and enlarge the contribution of atomic energy to peace, health and
prosperity throughout the world. One of the IAEA’s statutory functions is “to
establish or adopt, in consultation and, where appropriate, in collaboration with
the competent organs of the United Nations and with the specialized agencies
concerned, standards of safety… (including such standards for labour conditions),
and to provide for the application of these standards”.
Deriving from this function, in the area of preparedness and response for
a nuclear or radiological emergency, the IAEA develops safety standards and
technical tools, supports its Member States in strengthening their emergency
arrangements, provides for capacity building in its Member States, and performs,
at the request of Member States, peer reviews on established emergency
arrangements (such as Emergency Preparedness Review missions).

6

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
Basic Texts of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Volumes I and II,
2013 Edition, FAO, Rome (2013).

The role of the IAEA in the response to a nuclear or radiological emergency
derives, primarily, from the Early Notification Convention and the Assistance
Convention. It includes notification and the exchange of official information,
assessment of the potential consequences of an emergency and prognosis of its
possible progression, the provision of assistance to Member States on request,
and the provision of information to the public. The IAEA maintains its own
emergency arrangements to fulfil its role in emergency response.
The IAEA also provides the secretariat of IACRNE, coordinates the
inter-agency response in a nuclear or radiological emergency, and is the main
coordinating body for the development and maintenance of the Joint Radiation
Emergency Management Plan of the International Organizations.
The International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO)
ICAO is an organization based on the Convention on International Civil
Aviation7, signed in 1944. It became a specialized agency of the United Nations
in 1947, with a mission to serve as the global forum of States for international
civil aviation. ICAO is a cosponsoring organization of the Joint Radiation
Emergency Management Plan of the International Organizations. The activities of
ICAO8 include, for example, the reception and dissemination to aircraft in flight
of information concerning releases of radioactive material into the atmosphere
and provision of the regulatory framework for the safe transport of radioactive
material as cargo on aircraft. ICAO also works with international partners to
facilitate coordinated and consistent preparedness and response in the event of a
nuclear or radiological emergency that may have an impact on international civil
aviation.
The International Labour Organization (ILO)
The ILO was established in 1919 by the Treaty of Versailles to bring
governments, employers and trades unions together for united action in the
cause of social justice and better living conditions everywhere. It is a tripartite
organization, with representatives of workers and employers taking part in its
7

Convention on International Civil Aviation, Chicago (1944).
Convention on International Civil Aviation, Chicago (1944), Annex 3 —
Meteorological Service for International Air Navigation, Annex 11 — Air Traffic Services,
and Annex 15 — Aeronautical Information Services. Additionally, provisions related to the
transport of radioactive and nuclear material are contained in Annex 18 — The Safe Transport
of Dangerous Goods by Air and the associated Technical Instructions for the Safe Transport of
Dangerous Goods by Air.
8

work on equal status with representatives of governments. The ILO became the
first specialized agency of the United Nations in 1946. One of the main features
of the ILO, in addition to its tripartite structure, is its standard-setting activity.
Some 60 international conventions and recommendations concern the protection
of workers against occupational hazards.
Radiation protection is part of the ILO’s action on the protection of workers
against sickness, disease and injury arising out of employment, as mandated by
the Constitution of the International Labour Organization9. In 1949, the ILO
published a set of practical international standards on radiation protection which
were revised and considerably extended in 1957 and were incorporated into the
ILO Manual of Industrial Radiation Protection. In June 1960, the International
Labour Conference adopted the Radiation Protection Convention, 1960
(No. 115), and its accompanying Recommendation (No. 114).
The Convention applies to all activities involving the exposure of workers
to ionizing radiations in the course of their work and provides that each Member
of the ILO which ratifies it shall give effect to its provisions by means of laws
or regulations, codes of practice or other appropriate means. In 1986, the ILO
Governing Body approved the publication of a Code of Practice for the radiation
protection of workers (ionizing radiations) which gives practical guidance on the
implementation of a radiation protection programme at the enterprise level.
The International Maritime Organization (IMO)
The IMO, established in 1948, works in partnership with the IAEA and
other international organizations through its Marine Environment and Maritime
Safety Divisions in preparing for, and responding to, nuclear or radiological
emergencies in line with the Joint Radiation Emergency Management Plan of
the International Organizations. The IMO has general responsibilities in relation
to emergency preparedness, response and cooperation in accordance with the
OPRC Convention10 and the OPRC-HNS Protocol 11.
The OPRC-HNS Protocol, in particular, by its implicit definition of
hazardous and noxious substances, would also normally extend to incidents of
marine pollution involving nuclear or radioactive material occurring at sea or in

9

INTERNATIONAL LABOUR OFFICE, Constitution of the International Labour
Organization, Geneva (1919), as amended up to 1974.
10
International Convention on Oil Pollution Preparedness, Response and Co-operation
(1990), as amended.
11
Protocol on Preparedness, Response and Co-operation to Pollution Incidents by
Hazardous and Noxious Substances (2000).

port. In addition, the IMO has developed safety codes, standards and guidelines
for the transport of radioactive material as cargo and for nuclear powered ships
for the prevention of such incidents, which, in certain cases, also cover elements
of preparedness (see chapters VII and VIII of the SOLAS Convention)12.
INTERPOL
INTERPOL, founded in 1914, is the world’s largest international police
organization. It facilitates cross-border police cooperation, and supports and
assists all organizations, authorities and services whose mission it is to prevent or
combat international crime. INTERPOL provides law enforcement officials in the
field with support in an emergency and in operational activities, especially in its
priority crime areas of fugitives, public safety and terrorism, drugs and organized
crime, trafficking in human beings and financial and high technology crime.
When necessary, INTERPOL can deploy an Incident Response Team
to support a country or countries in tasks as requested. The Command and
Coordination Centre operates 24 hours a day and works in INTERPOL’s four
official languages, namely English, French, Spanish and Arabic, and serves as the
first point of contact for any member country faced with a crisis. The Command
and Coordination Centre can also assume a coordination role if an attack or
disaster involves several member countries or if a member country’s own ability
to assume such a role has been compromised.
The OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (OECD/NEA)
The OECD/NEA was established in 1958. Its mission is to assist its
member countries in maintaining and further developing, through international
cooperation, the scientific, technological and legal bases required for a safe,
environmentally benign and economical use of nuclear energy for peaceful
purposes. Emergency preparedness and emergency management have long been
main areas of focus for the OECD/NEA’s Committee on Radiation Protection and
Public Health. Following the Three Mile Island accident in 1979, and in particular
following the Chernobyl accident in 1986, the OECD/NEA has worked to share
national experience in emergency preparedness and emergency management, and
to identify and address emerging issues. The OECD/NEA’s International Nuclear
Emergency Exercise series, INEX, has been an important mechanism for this
work.

12

International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea (1974), as amended.

While the OECD/NEA member countries have assigned no statutory
functions to the OECD/NEA for preparedness and response to a nuclear or
radiological emergency, its work in this area has provided numerous useful
resources to its members. The OECD/NEA is a founding and active member of
IACRNE, and a cosponsoring organization of the Joint Radiation Emergency
Management Plan of the International Organizations.
The Pan American Health Organization (PAHO)
PAHO, founded in 1902, is the specialized health agency of the
Inter-American System, serves as the Regional Office for the Americas of the
World Health Organization (WHO), and is a member of the United Nations
system. According to the PAHO constitution13, its governing bodies set the
organization’s mandates. PAHO has technical expertise at its headquarters and at
a number of country offices and scientific centres.
Among other functions, PAHO provides technical cooperation support in
alerts and response to epidemics, in disaster preparedness, in health systems and
services, in environmental health, in health legislation, in access to medicines
and technologies, and in regulatory capacity. Several resolutions have been
approved in relation to emergencies, including the formulation of regional plans
of action for various types of disaster, and in relation to radiation safety standards
that address nuclear and radiological emergencies. PAHO is a Party to the
International Health Regulations14, the legally binding instrument that establishes
the global health security framework, covering biological, chemical and radiation
related hazards.
The Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban
Treaty Organization (CTBTO)
The Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty15 (CTBT) bans nuclear
explosions by all States Parties to the Treaty at any place under their jurisdiction
or control, in the atmosphere, underwater and underground. In preparation for the
entry into force of the Treaty, the CTBTO was tasked in 1996 with establishing
the International Monitoring System (IMS) for monitoring for signs of a nuclear

13

PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Constitution of the Pan American
Health Organization, PAHO, Buenos Aires (1947) as amended up to 1999.
14
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, International Health Regulations, WHO,
Geneva (2005).
15
Comprehensive Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty, United Nations, New York (1996).

weapon test explosion or any other nuclear explosion. The IMS includes a
number of globally distributed radionuclide stations that continuously, and in
near real time, report spectral measurements with high sensitivity for a large set
of fission and activation products.
The response task for the CTBTO in a nuclear or radiological emergency
is to provide monitoring data on radionuclides and noble gases in real time,
including confirmation of non-detection. Advice on predictions in relation
to atmospheric transport and dispersion may also be provided, as appropriate.
Following an emergency, the CTBTO provides all relevant results on air
concentrations of radionuclides from the global monitoring network and
contributes relevant expertise.
The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
UNEP16 was established in 1972 with headquarters in Nairobi, Kenya,
and with six regional offices and various country offices. UNEP, as the leading
global environmental authority, sets the global environmental agenda, promotes
the coherent implementation of the environmental dimension of sustainable
development within the United Nations system and serves as an authoritative
advocate for the global environment. UNEP’s disasters and conflicts
subprogramme seeks to minimize environmental threats to human well-being
from the environmental causes and consequences of conflicts and disasters.
In addition, the UNEP/OCHA Joint Environment Unit based in Geneva,
Switzerland, mobilizes and coordinates the international emergency response
to acute environmental risks caused by conflicts, natural disasters and industrial
accidents.
Further, the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects of Atomic
Radiation (UNSCEAR), which was established by the General Assembly17 in
response to widespread concerns about the effects of radiation on human health
and the environment, evaluates radiation doses, effects and risks worldwide. The
UNSCEAR secretariat is based in Vienna and operates under the auspices of
UNEP.

16

Institutional and Financial Arrangements for International Environmental Cooperation,
United Nations General Assembly Resolution A/RES/27/2997, UN, New York (1972).
17
United Nations General Assembly Resolution 913 (X), UN, New York (1955).

The United Nations Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs
(OCHA)
OCHA, established in 1991 as an entity within the United Nations
Secretariat, is responsible for bringing together humanitarian actors to ensure
a coherent response to emergencies. The mandate of OCHA encompasses the
coordination of humanitarian response, policy development and humanitarian
advocacy. OCHA’s activities include, for example, support in the planning of
inter-agency response, mobilization and monitoring of humanitarian funding,
reporting, analysis and information sharing, and deployment of rapid response
teams for emergency relief.
OCHA also promotes preparedness to lessen the impact of disasters on
vulnerable communities, especially in disaster prone countries. OCHA works
with national governments, regional bodies and other agencies to develop, to test
and to implement measures that help save lives in an emergency. OCHA also
provides tools for contingency planning, hazard mapping and early warning
reports, for example. With its international partners, OCHA works to ensure that
the international community is ready to respond to humanitarian emergencies
without delay and with the right assistance.
The World Health Organization (WHO)
The WHO, established in 1948, is the United Nations’ specialized agency
for health, and is the directing and coordinating authority on international health
in the United Nations system. With 194 Member States, the WHO carries out
its mandates through its headquarters in Geneva, six world regional offices
and 150 country offices — and through close collaboration with national and
international partners worldwide. Under its Constitution18, the resolutions of its
governing body, and as a Party to both the Early Notification Convention and the
Assistance Convention, the WHO provides technical support to its member states
in relation to public health and medical response to nuclear and radiological
emergencies.
Under the International Health Regulations, which are legally binding upon
States, the WHO also conducts global public health surveillance, receives and
assesses notifications and reports from States as required under the International
Health Regulations, supports member states, and coordinates the public health
response to a broad range of health events and risks, including biological,

18

Constitution of the World Health Organization adopted by the International Health
Conference, New York (1946), as amended up to 2005.

chemical and radiation related hazards. It also supports countries in developing
the necessary core public health capacities for these hazards.
The World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
The WMO is the authoritative organization in the United Nations system on
the state and behaviour of the Earth’s atmosphere, its interaction with the oceans,
the climate it produces and the resulting distribution of water resources. The
International Meteorological Organization, founded in 1873, was the predecessor
of the WMO, which was formally created when the WMO Convention19 came
into force in 1950. The WMO became a specialized agency of the United Nations
in 1951 with a mandate covering the areas of meteorology (weather and climate),
operational hydrology and related geophysical sciences.
The WMO has an operational infrastructure comprising a number of World
Meteorological Centres, Global Processing Centres for Long Range Forecasts,
Regional Climate Centres and Regional Specialized Meteorological Centres.
Some of these Regional Specialized Meteorological Centres support the IAEA
through the provision of atmospheric transport modelling outputs.
The WMO promotes cooperation among its members in the creation
and maintenance of meteorological, climatological, hydrological and
geophysical observation networks, the exchange of data, and the processing and
standardization of data, and in order to provide assistance, where necessary, with
technology transfer, training and research. It also fosters collaboration between
the national meteorological and hydrological services of its members.
The WMO fosters the application of meteorology in public weather services
in order to better serve weather sensitive sectors — for example, agriculture,
aviation, shipping, the environment and water resource management — and to
mitigate the impacts of natural disasters. In addition, the WMO facilitates the free
and unrestricted exchange of weather and climate related data and information
products and services in real time or near real time on matters relating to public
safety and security, economic welfare and environmental protection.

19

Convention of the World Meteorological Organization adopted by the Washington
Conference, Washington, DC (1947), as amended up to 2007.

THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
BACKGROUND
Radioactivity is a natural phenomenon and natural sources of radiation are
features of the environment. Radiation and radioactive substances have many
beneficial applications, ranging from power generation to uses in medicine,
industry and agriculture. The radiation risks to workers and the public and to the
environment that may arise from these applications have to be assessed and, if
necessary, controlled.
Activities such as the medical uses of radiation, the operation of nuclear
installations, the production, transport and use of radioactive material, and the
management of radioactive waste must therefore be subject to standards of safety.
Regulating safety is a national responsibility. However, radiation risks may
transcend national borders, and international cooperation serves to promote and
enhance safety globally by exchanging experience and by improving capabilities
to control hazards, to prevent accidents, to respond to emergencies and to mitigate
any harmful consequences.
States have an obligation of diligence and duty of care, and are expected to
fulfil their national and international undertakings and obligations.
International safety standards provide support for States in meeting their
obligations under general principles of international law, such as those relating to
environmental protection. International safety standards also promote and assure
confidence in safety and facilitate international commerce and trade.
A global nuclear safety regime is in place and is being continuously
improved. IAEA safety standards, which support the implementation of binding
international instruments and national safety infrastructures, are a cornerstone
of this global regime. The IAEA safety standards constitute a useful tool
for contracting parties to assess their performance under these international
conventions.
THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
The status of the IAEA safety standards derives from the IAEA’s Statute,
which authorizes the IAEA to establish or adopt, in consultation and, where
appropriate, in collaboration with the competent organs of the United Nations
and with the specialized agencies concerned, standards of safety for protection of
health and minimization of danger to life and property, and to provide for their
application.

With a view to ensuring the protection of people and the environment
from harmful effects of ionizing radiation, the IAEA safety standards establish
fundamental safety principles, requirements and measures to control the radiation
exposure of people and the release of radioactive material to the environment, to
restrict the likelihood of events that might lead to a loss of control over a nuclear
reactor core, nuclear chain reaction, radioactive source or any other source of
radiation, and to mitigate the consequences of such events if they were to occur.
The standards apply to facilities and activities that give rise to radiation risks,
including nuclear installations, the use of radiation and radioactive sources, the
transport of radioactive material and the management of radioactive waste.
Safety measures and security measures1 have in common the aim of
protecting human life and health and the environment. Safety measures and
security measures must be designed and implemented in an integrated manner
so that security measures do not compromise safety and safety measures do not
compromise security.
The IAEA safety standards reflect an international consensus on what
constitutes a high level of safety for protecting people and the environment
from harmful effects of ionizing radiation. They are issued in the IAEA Safety
Standards Series, which has three categories (see Fig. 1).
Safety Fundamentals
Safety Fundamentals present the fundamental safety objective and principles
of protection and safety, and provide the basis for the safety requirements.
Safety Requirements
An integrated and consistent set of Safety Requirements establishes
the requirements that must be met to ensure the protection of people and the
environment, both now and in the future. The requirements are governed by the
objective and principles of the Safety Fundamentals. If the requirements are not
met, measures must be taken to reach or restore the required level of safety. The
format and style of the requirements facilitate their use for the establishment, in a
harmonized manner, of a national regulatory framework. Requirements, including
numbered ‘overarching’ requirements, are expressed as ‘shall’ statements. Many
requirements are not addressed to a specific party, the implication being that the
appropriate parties are responsible for fulfilling them.

1

See also publications issued in the IAEA Nuclear Security Series.

Safety Fundamentals

Fundamental Safety Principles
General Safety Requirements

Specific Safety Requirements

Part 1. Governmental, Legal and
Regulatory Framework for Safety

1. Site Evaluation for
Nuclear Installations

Part 2. Leadership and Management
for Safety

2. Safety of Nuclear Power Plants

Part 3. Radiation Protection and
Safety of Radiation Sources

2/1 Design
2/2 Commissioning and Operation

Part 4. Safety Assessment for
Facilities and Activities

3. Safety of Research Reactors

Part 5. Predisposal Management
of Radioactive Waste

4. Safety of Nuclear Fuel
Cycle Facilities

Part 6. Decommissioning and
Termination of Activities

5. Safety of Radioactive Waste
Disposal Facilities

Part 7. Emergency Preparedness
and Response

6. Safe Transport of
Radioactive Material

Collection of Safety Guides
FIG. 1. The long term structure of the IAEA Safety Standards Series.

Safety Guides
Safety Guides provide recommendations and guidance on how to comply
with the safety requirements, indicating an international consensus that it
is necessary to take the measures recommended (or equivalent alternative
measures). The Safety Guides present international good practices, and
increasingly they reflect best practices, to help users striving to achieve high
levels of safety. The recommendations provided in Safety Guides are expressed
as ‘should’ statements.
APPLICATION OF THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
The principal users of safety standards in IAEA Member States are
regulatory bodies and other relevant national authorities. The IAEA safety
standards are also used by co-sponsoring organizations and by many organizations
that design, construct and operate nuclear facilities, as well as organizations
involved in the use of radiation and radioactive sources.

The IAEA safety standards are applicable, as relevant, throughout the entire
lifetime of all facilities and activities — existing and new — utilized for peaceful
purposes and to protective actions to reduce existing radiation risks. They can be
used by States as a reference for their national regulations in respect of facilities
and activities.
The IAEA’s Statute makes the safety standards binding on the IAEA in
relation to its own operations and also on States in relation to IAEA assisted
operations.
The IAEA safety standards also form the basis for the IAEA’s safety review
services, and they are used by the IAEA in support of competence building,
including the development of educational curricula and training courses.
International conventions contain requirements similar to those in
the IAEA safety standards and make them binding on contracting parties.
The IAEA safety standards, supplemented by international conventions, industry
standards and detailed national requirements, establish a consistent basis for
protecting people and the environment. There will also be some special aspects
of safety that need to be assessed at the national level. For example, many of
the IAEA safety standards, in particular those addressing aspects of safety in
planning or design, are intended to apply primarily to new facilities and activities.
The requirements established in the IAEA safety standards might not be fully
met at some existing facilities that were built to earlier standards. The way in
which IAEA safety standards are to be applied to such facilities is a decision for
individual States.
The scientific considerations underlying the IAEA safety standards provide
an objective basis for decisions concerning safety; however, decision makers
must also make informed judgements and must determine how best to balance
the benefits of an action or an activity against the associated radiation risks and
any other detrimental impacts to which it gives rise.
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS FOR THE IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
The preparation and review of the safety standards involves the IAEA
Secretariat and five safety standards committees, for emergency preparedness
and response (EPReSC) (as of 2016), nuclear safety (NUSSC), radiation
safety (RASSC), the safety of radioactive waste (WASSC) and the safe
transport of radioactive material (TRANSSC), and a Commission on Safety
Standards (CSS) which oversees the IAEA safety standards programme
(see Fig. 2).
All IAEA Member States may nominate experts for the safety standards
committees and may provide comments on draft standards. The membership of

Outline and work plan
prepared by the Secretariat;
review by the safety standards
committees and the CSS

Secretariat and
consultants:
drafting of new or revision
of existing safety standard
Draft

Review by
safety standards
committee(s)

Draft
Member States
Comments

Final draft

Endorsement
by the CSS

FIG. 2. The process for developing a new safety standard or revising an existing standard.

the Commission on Safety Standards is appointed by the Director General and
includes senior governmental officials having responsibility for establishing
national standards.
A management system has been established for the processes of planning,
developing, reviewing, revising and establishing the IAEA safety standards.
It articulates the mandate of the IAEA, the vision for the future application of
the safety standards, policies and strategies, and corresponding functions and
responsibilities.
INTERACTION WITH OTHER INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS
The findings of the United Nations Scientific Committee on the Effects
of Atomic Radiation (UNSCEAR) and the recommendations of international
expert bodies, notably the International Commission on Radiological Protection

(ICRP), are taken into account in developing the IAEA safety standards. Some
safety standards are developed in cooperation with other bodies in the United
Nations system or other specialized agencies, including the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations, the United Nations Environment Programme,
the International Labour Organization, the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency, the
Pan American Health Organization and the World Health Organization.
INTERPRETATION OF THE TEXT
Safety related terms are to be understood as defined in the IAEA Safety
Glossary (see http://www-ns.iaea.org/standards/safety-glossary.htm). Otherwise,
words are used with the spellings and meanings assigned to them in the latest
edition of The Concise Oxford Dictionary. For Safety Guides, the English version
of the text is the authoritative version.
The background and context of each standard in the IAEA Safety
Standards Series and its objective, scope and structure are explained in Section 1,
Introduction, of each publication.
Material for which there is no appropriate place in the body text
(e.g. material that is subsidiary to or separate from the body text, is included
in support of statements in the body text, or describes methods of calculation,
procedures or limits and conditions) may be presented in appendices or annexes.
An appendix, if included, is considered to form an integral part of the
safety standard. Material in an appendix has the same status as the body text,
and the IAEA assumes authorship of it. Annexes and footnotes to the main text,
if included, are used to provide practical examples or additional information or
explanation. Annexes and footnotes are not integral parts of the main text. Annex
material published by the IAEA is not necessarily issued under its authorship;
material under other authorship may be presented in annexes to the safety
standards. Extraneous material presented in annexes is excerpted and adapted as
necessary to be generally useful.

CONTENTS
1.

2.

3.

4.

5.

INTRODUCTION . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

1

Background (1.1–1.9) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Objective (1.10–1.13) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Scope (1.14–1.16) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Structure (1.17) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

1
3
4
5

INTERPRETATION, RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS AND
ENTRY INTO FORCE  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

5

Definitions (2.1)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Interpretation (2.2)  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Resolution of conflicts (2.3–2.5) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Entry into force (2.6–2.8) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

5
5
6
6

GOALS OF EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
AND RESPONSE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

6

Goal of emergency preparedness (3.1) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Goals of emergency response (3.2) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

6
7

GENERAL REQUIREMENTS . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

7

Requirement 1: The emergency management system (4.1–4.4) . . . . . .
Requirement 2: Roles and responsibilities in
emergency preparedness and response (4.5–4.17) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 3: Responsibilities of international organizations in
emergency preparedness and response. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 4: Hazard assessment (4.18–4.26) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 5: Protection strategy for a nuclear or radiological
emergency (4.27–4.31). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

7
8
12
12
16

FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

19

General (5.1). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

19

Requirement 6: Managing operations in an emergency response
(5.2–5.10). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

19

Requirement 7: Identifying and notifying a nuclear or radiological
emergency and activating an emergency response (5.11–5.22). . . . .
Requirement 8: Taking mitigatory actions (5.23–5.30). . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 9: Taking urgent protective actions and
other response actions (5.31–5.44). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 10: Providing instructions, warnings and
relevant information to the public for emergency preparedness
and response (5.45–5.48). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 11: Protecting emergency workers and helpers in
an emergency (5.49–5.61) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 12: Managing the medical response in a nuclear or
radiological emergency (5.62–5.68). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 13: Communicating with the public throughout
a nuclear or radiological emergency (5.69–5.75). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 14: Taking early protective actions and
other response actions (5.76–5.83). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 15: Managing radioactive waste in a nuclear or
radiological emergency (5.84–5.88). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 16: Mitigating non-radiological consequences of
a nuclear or radiological emergency and of an emergency
response (5.89–5.92) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 17: Requesting, providing and receiving
international assistance for emergency preparedness and
response (5.93–5.94) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 18: Terminating a nuclear or radiological emergency
(5.95–5.101). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 19: Analysing the nuclear or radiological emergency
and the emergency response (5.102–5.105). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.

21
25
27
33
34
37
39
41
43
44
45
45
47

REQUIREMENTS FOR INFRASTRUCTURE . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

48

General (6.1). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

48

Requirement 20: Authorities for emergency preparedness and
response (6.2–6.6) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 21: Organization and staffing for emergency
preparedness and response (6.7–6.11) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 22: Coordination of emergency preparedness and
response (6.12–6.15) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 23: Plans and procedures for emergency response
(6.16–6.21). . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

48
50
51
52

Requirement 24: Logistical support and facilities for
emergency response (6.22–6.27) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 25: Training, drills and exercises for
emergency preparedness and response (6.28–6.33). . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Requirement 26: Quality management programme for
emergency preparedness and response (6.34–6.39). . . . . . . . . . . . . .
APPENDIX I:

54
56
57

GUIDANCE VALUES FOR RESTRICTING
EXPOSURE OF EMERGENCY WORKERS . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

APPENDIX II: GENERIC CRITERIA FOR USE IN
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE  . . . . . .

61

REFERENCES. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

75

ANNEX:

APPLICABILITY OF PARAGRAPHS IN
THIS PUBLICATION BY EMERGENCY
PREPAREDNESS CATEGORY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 

77

DEFINITIONS. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

79
99

1. INTRODUCTION
BACKGROUND

1.1. This IAEA Safety Requirements publication is governed by the fundamental
safety objective and the fundamental safety principles established in the
IAEA Safety Standards publication Fundamental Safety Principles (SF-1) [1].
In particular, this publication addresses Principle 9, which is concerned with
the arrangements that must be made for preparedness and response for a nuclear
or radiological emergency [1].
1.2. This publication also allows for consistency with Essential Element
No. 11 of the IAEA Nuclear Security Fundamentals [2], which is concerned
with the planning for, preparedness for and response to a nuclear security
event. It therefore addresses the emergency arrangements that must be in place
irrespective of the initiator of the emergency, which could be a natural event,
a human error, a mechanical or other failure, or a nuclear security event.
1.3. In 2002, the IAEA published the Safety Requirements publication,
Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency (GS-R-2)1,
jointly sponsored by seven international organizations (the Food and Agriculture
Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the IAEA, the International Labour
Organization (ILO), the OECD Nuclear Energy Agency (OECD/NEA), the
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), the United Nations Office for
the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) and the World Health
Organization (WHO)). This Safety Requirements publication is a revised edition
of IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-R-2, updated to take into account
developments and experience gained since 2002. In the revision process, due
consideration has been given to — but was not limited to — experience gained
from the response to the accident at the Fukushima Daiichi nuclear power plant
and to recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological
Protection (ICRP) [3]. The IAEA Safety Guides Criteria for Use in Preparedness
1

FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR
ORGANIZATION, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH
ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS OFFICE FOR THE COORDINATION OF
HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Preparedness and
Response for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-R-2,
IAEA, Vienna (2002).

1

and Response for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency (GSG-2) [4] and
Arrangements for Preparedness for a Nuclear or Radiological Emergency
(GS-G-2.1) [5] elaborate on the requirements established in GS-R-2 and provide
recommendations and guidance on their implementation. In addition, Planning
and Preparing for Emergency Response to Transport Accidents Involving
Radioactive Material (TS-G-1.2 (ST-3)) [6] provides guidance on planning
and preparing for emergency response to transport accidents involving
radioactive material.
1.4. This Safety Requirements publication addresses the requirements for
preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency (including
requirements for the transition to an existing exposure situation). Other Safety
Requirements publications refer to and are consistent with these requirements
in relation to emergency preparedness and response.
1.5. The response to a nuclear or radiological emergency may involve many
national organizations (e.g. the operating organization and response organizations
at the local, regional and national levels) as well as international organizations.
The functions of many of these organizations may be the same for the response
to a nuclear or radiological emergency as for the response to a conventional
emergency. However, the response to a nuclear or radiological emergency might
also involve specialized agencies and technical experts. Therefore, in order to be
effective, the response to a nuclear or radiological emergency has to be well
coordinated, and emergency arrangements have to be appropriately integrated
with arrangements for the response to a conventional emergency and with the
response measures for a nuclear security event.
1.6. Safety measures and security measures have in common the aim
of protecting human life and health and protecting the environment.
Paragraph 1.10 of Ref. [1] states that “Safety measures and security measures
must be designed and implemented in an integrated manner so that security
measures do not compromise safety and safety measures do not compromise
security.” This emphasizes the importance of effective coordination between
safety measures and security measures in relation to the response to a nuclear
or radiological emergency.
1.7. This publication also provides guidance for (1) preparedness and response
for a nuclear or radiological emergency by the relevant international organizations
and (2) the inter-agency coordination performed through the Inter-Agency
Committee on Radiological and Nuclear Emergencies (IACRNE).

2

1.8. It is assumed that States applying these requirements have in place
an infrastructure for the purpose of regulating the safety of facilities and activities
that could pose radiation risks. This includes laws and regulations governing the
safe operation of facilities and the safe conduct of activities, and an independent
regulatory body with responsibilities for establishing and enforcing rules for
safe operation and safe conduct. In this context, the IAEA has issued General
Safety Requirements publications on the Governmental, Legal and Regulatory
Framework for Safety (GSR Part 1) [7] and on Radiation Protection and Safety
of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety Standards (GSR Part 3) [8].
1.9. In addition, it is assumed that States applying these requirements have
in place an infrastructure for the purpose of regulating the nuclear security
of nuclear material and other radioactive material, associated facilities and
associated activities, as well as nuclear security measures for nuclear material
and other radioactive material out of regulatory control. This also includes
an independent regulatory body as well as other competent authorities with
responsibilities for regulating nuclear security. In this context, IAEA Nuclear
Security Series publications [9–11] provide recommendations.
OBJECTIVE

1.10. The present publication establishes the requirements for an adequate level
of preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency. The
application of these requirements is also intended to mitigate the consequences
of a nuclear or radiological emergency if such an emergency arises despite all
efforts made to prevent it.
1.11. The fulfilment of these requirements will contribute to the harmonization
worldwide of arrangements for preparedness and response for a nuclear
or radiological emergency.
1.12. These requirements are intended to be applied by the government at the
national level by means of adopting legislation and establishing regulations, and
by making other arrangements, including assigning responsibilities (e.g. to the
operating organization or the operating personnel of a facility or an activity, local
or national officials, response organizations or the regulatory body) and verifying
their effective fulfilment.

3

1.13. The requirements are also intended for use by response organizations,
operating organizations and the regulatory body in respect of preparedness
and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency, as well as by authorities
with responsibilities for emergency preparedness and response at the local and
regional level and, as appropriate, by relevant international organizations at the
international level.
SCOPE

1.14. The requirements apply for preparedness and response for a nuclear
or radiological emergency in relation to all those facilities and activities, as well
as sources, with the potential for causing radiation exposure, environmental
contamination or concern on the part of the public warranting protective actions
and other response actions.
1.15. The requirements also apply to preparedness and response for a nuclear
or radiological emergency in relation to off-site jurisdictions that may need
to take protective actions and other response actions.
1.16. The requirements apply for preparedness and response for a nuclear
or radiological emergency irrespective of the initiator of the emergency, whether
the emergency follows a natural event, a human error, a mechanical or other
failure, or a nuclear security event2. The requirements do not cover preparedness
for, or response measures that are specific to, nuclear security events, for which
recommendations are provided in Refs [9–11]. Such response measures include
activities for the identification, collection, packaging and transport of evidence
contaminated with radionuclides, nuclear forensics and related actions in the
context of investigation into the circumstances surrounding a nuclear security
event. The requirements established here do provide for a coordinated and
integrated approach to preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological
emergency arising from a nuclear security event that necessitates protective
actions and other response actions to be taken for protection of members of the
public, workers and emergency workers, helpers in an emergency and patients.
2

A ‘nuclear security event’ is an event that has potential or actual implications for
nuclear security that must be addressed. Such events include criminal or intentional unauthorized
acts involving or directed at nuclear material, other radioactive material, associated facilities
or associated activities. A nuclear security event, for example, sabotage of a nuclear facility
or detonation of a radiological dispersal device, may give rise to a nuclear or radiological
emergency.

4

STRUCTURE

1.17. This publication comprises six sections. Section 2 provides for the
interpretation and entry into force of the requirements. Section 3 establishes
the goals of emergency preparedness and response. Section 4 establishes the
general requirements that are to be met before effective emergency arrangements
can be made, defines by using a graded approach the emergency preparedness
categories for which the requirements have been established and elaborates
on the development of a protection strategy on the basis of the hazards assessed.
Section 5 establishes the requirements to be met for performing the functions
critical for an effective emergency response. Section 6 establishes requirements
for the infrastructure necessary to develop and maintain adequate arrangements
for preparedness. Guidance values for restricting exposure of emergency
workers in a nuclear or radiological emergency are provided in Appendix I.
Generic criteria for use in emergency preparedness and response are provided
in Appendix II. Annex I presents the applicability of paragraphs in the text for
each emergency preparedness category.

2. INTERPRETATION, RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS
AND ENTRY INTO FORCE
DEFINITIONS

2.1. Terms used in this publication have the meanings given under ‘Definitions’
on page 79. If not otherwise defined under Definitions, terms are used as defined
in the IAEA Safety Glossary, 2007 Edition [12].
INTERPRETATION

2.2. Except as specifically authorized by the statutory governing body
of a Sponsoring Organization, no interpretation of this standard by any officer
or employee of the Sponsoring Organization other than a written interpretation
by the Director General of the Sponsoring Organization shall be binding on the
Sponsoring Organization.

5

RESOLUTION OF CONFLICTS

2.3. The requirements of this standard are established in addition to and not
in place of other applicable requirements, such as those of relevant binding
conventions and national laws and regulations.
2.4. In cases of conflict between the requirements of this standard and other
applicable requirements, the government or the regulatory body, as appropriate,
shall determine which requirements are to be enforced.
2.5. Nothing in this standard shall be construed as restricting any actions that
may otherwise be necessary for protection and safety or as relieving the parties
referred to in this standard from complying with applicable laws and regulations.
ENTRY INTO FORCE

2.6. The Secretariat envisages that, for the IAEA’s own operations and for
those operations assisted by the IAEA, arrangements will be made to meet
these requirements within a period of no more than one year from the date
of publication of this standard.
2.7. This standard shall come into force within a period of no more than one year
from the date of publication of this standard for all the Sponsoring Organizations
in accordance with their respective mandates.
2.8. If a State decides to adopt this standard, this standard shall come into force
at the time indicated in the formal adoption by that State, and preferably within
a period of no more than one year from the date of its publication.

3. GOALS OF EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
AND RESPONSE
GOAL OF EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS

3.1. The goal of emergency preparedness is to ensure that an adequate
capability is in place within the operating organization and at local, regional and
national levels and, where appropriate, at the international level, for an effective
6

response in a nuclear or radiological emergency. This capability relates to an
integrated set of infrastructural elements that include, but are not limited to:
authority and responsibilities; organization and staffing; coordination; plans and
procedures; tools, equipment and facilities; training, drills and exercises; and
a management system.
GOALS OF EMERGENCY RESPONSE

3.2. In a nuclear or radiological emergency, the goals of emergency response are:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

To regain control of the situation and to mitigate consequences;
To save lives;
To avoid or to minimize severe deterministic effects;
To render first aid, to provide critical medical treatment and to manage the
treatment of radiation injuries;
To reduce the risk of stochastic effects;
To keep the public informed and to maintain public trust;
To mitigate, to the extent practicable, non-radiological consequences;
To protect, to the extent practicable, property and the environment;
To prepare, to the extent practicable, for the resumption of normal social
and economic activity.

4. GENERAL REQUIREMENTS
Requirement 1: The emergency management system
The government shall ensure that an integrated and coordinated emergency
management system for preparedness and response for a nuclear
or radiological emergency is established and maintained.
4.1. The government shall ensure that an emergency management system
is established and maintained on the territories of and within the jurisdiction
of the State for the purposes of emergency response to protect human life, health,
property and the environment in the event of a nuclear or radiological emergency.

7

4.2. The emergency management system shall be designed to be commensurate
with the results of the hazard assessment (see paras 4.18–4.26) and shall enable
an effective emergency response to reasonably foreseeable events (including
very low probability events).
4.3. The emergency management system shall be integrated, to the extent
practicable, into an all-hazards emergency management system (see paras
5.6 and 5.7).
4.4. The government shall ensure the coordination of and consistency
of national emergency arrangements with the relevant international
emergency arrangements3.
Requirement 2: Roles and responsibilities in emergency preparedness and
response
The government shall make provisions to ensure that roles and
responsibilities for preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological
emergency are clearly specified and clearly assigned.
General
4.5. The government shall make adequate preparations to anticipate, prepare for,
respond to and recover from a nuclear or radiological emergency at the operating
organization, local, regional and national levels, and also, as appropriate, at the
international level. These preparations shall include adopting legislation and
establishing regulations for effectively governing the preparedness and response
for a nuclear or radiological emergency at all levels (see para. 1.12).
4.6. The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place for effectively
governing the provision of prompt and adequate compensation of victims for
damage due to a nuclear or radiological emergency.

3

Arrangements set under the Assistance Convention and under the Early Notification
Convention [13] are examples of international emergency arrangements that are relevant for
States Parties to these Conventions.

8

4.7. The government shall ensure that all roles and responsibilities for
preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency are clearly
allocated in advance among operating organizations, the regulatory body and
response organizations4.
4.8. The government shall ensure that response organizations, operating
organizations and the regulatory body have the necessary human, financial
and other resources, in view of their expected roles and responsibilities and
the assessed hazards, to prepare for and to deal with both radiological and
non-radiological consequences of a nuclear or radiological emergency, whether
the emergency occurs within or beyond national borders.
4.9. The government shall ensure that operating organizations, response
organizations and the regulatory body establish, maintain and demonstrate
leadership in relation to preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological
emergency [14].
Coordinating mechanism
4.10. The government shall establish a national coordinating mechanism5 to be
functional at the preparedness stage, consistent with its emergency management
system, with the following functions:
(a)
(b)
(c)

To ensure that roles and responsibilities are clearly specified and are
understood by operating organizations, response organizations and the
regulatory body (see para. 4.7);
To coordinate the hazard assessment within the State (see paras 4.18–4.26)
and periodic reviews of the assessed hazards (see para. 4.25);
To coordinate and ensure consistency between the emergency arrangements
of the various response organizations, operating organizations and the
regulatory body at local, regional and national levels under the all-hazards
approach, including those arrangements for response to relevant nuclear
security events, and, as appropriate, those arrangements of other States and
of international organizations;
4

This also includes the allocation of roles and responsibilities, as appropriate, among
members of the government.
5
The mechanism for ensuring coordination may differ for different tasks. It may involve
an existing body or a newly established body (e.g. a committee consisting of representatives
from different organizations and bodies) that has been given the authority to ensure the
necessary coordination.

9

(d)

(e)

(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)

To ensure consistency among requirements for emergency arrangements,
contingency plans and security plans of operating organizations
specified by the regulatory body and by other competent authorities with
responsibilities for regulating nuclear security, as relevant, and to ensure
that these arrangements and plans are integrated (see para. 4.14(b));
To ensure that appropriate emergency arrangements are in place, both on the
site and off the site, as appropriate, in relation to facilities and activities
under regulatory control, both within the State and, as relevant, beyond its
borders, and also for sources that are not under regulatory control6;
To coordinate arrangements made for enforcing compliance with
the national requirements for emergency preparedness and response
as established by legislation and regulations (see paras 1.12, 4.5 and 4.12);
To coordinate a subsequent analysis of an emergency, including analysis
of the emergency response (see Requirement 19);
To ensure that appropriate and coordinated programmes of training and
exercises are in place and implemented, and that training and exercises are
systematically evaluated;
To coordinate effective communication with the public in preparedness for
a nuclear or radiological emergency.

Regulatory body
4.11. The government shall ensure that arrangements for preparedness and
response to a nuclear or radiological emergency for facilities and activities
under the responsibility of the operating organization are dealt with through the
regulatory process.
4.12. The regulatory body is required to establish or adopt regulations and
guides to specify the principles, requirements and associated criteria for safety
upon which its regulatory judgements, decisions and actions are based [7]. These
regulations and guides shall include principles, requirements and associated
criteria for emergency preparedness and response for the operating organization
(see also paras 1.12 and 4.5).

6

Examples of sources not under regulatory control are sources that have been
abandoned, lost or stolen and sources under governmental control but not under regulatory
control. Examples also include radioactive material that is out of regulatory control as discussed
in Ref. [11].

10

4.13. The regulatory body shall require that arrangements for preparedness and
response for a nuclear or radiological emergency be in place for the on-site area
for any regulated facility or activity that could necessitate emergency response
actions. Appropriate emergency arrangements shall be established by the time the
source is brought to the site, and complete emergency arrangements shall be in
place before the commencement of operation of the facility or commencement
of the activity. The regulatory body shall verify compliance with the requirements
for such arrangements.
4.14. Before commencement of operation of the facility or commencement of the
activity, the regulatory body shall ensure, for all facilities and activities under
regulatory control that could necessitate emergency response actions, that the
on-site emergency arrangements:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Are integrated with those of other response organizations, as appropriate;
Are integrated with contingency plans in the context of Ref. [9] and with
security plans in the context of Ref. [10];
Provide, to the extent practicable, assurance of an effective response to a
nuclear or radiological emergency.

4.15. The regulatory body shall ensure that the operating organization
is given sufficient authority to promptly take necessary protective actions
on the site in response to a nuclear or radiological emergency that could result
in off-site consequences.
Operating organization
4.16. The operating organization shall establish and maintain arrangements for
on-site preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency for
facilities or activities under its responsibility, in accordance with the applicable
requirements (see paras 1.12, 4.5 and 4.12).

11

4.17. The operating organization shall demonstrate that, and shall provide the
regulatory body with an assurance that, emergency arrangements are in place for
an effective response on the site to a nuclear or radiological emergency in relation
to a facility or an activity under its responsibility.
Requirement 3: Responsibilities of international organizations in emergency
preparedness and response
Relevant international organizations shall coordinate their arrangements
in preparedness for a nuclear or radiological emergency and their emergency
response actions.7
Requirement 4: Hazard assessment
The government shall ensure that a hazard assessment is performed
to provide a basis for a graded approach in preparedness and response for
a nuclear or radiological emergency.
4.18. Hazards shall be identified and potential consequences of an emergency
shall be assessed to provide a basis for establishing arrangements for preparedness
and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency. These arrangements shall
be commensurate with the hazards identified and the potential consequences
of an emergency.
4.19. For the purposes of these safety requirements, assessed hazards are grouped
in accordance with the emergency preparedness categories shown in Table 1. The
five emergency preparedness categories (hereinafter referred to as ‘categories’)
in Table 1 establish the basis for a graded approach to the application of these
requirements and for developing generically justified and optimized arrangements
for preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency.

7

The Inter-Agency Committee on Radiological and Nuclear Emergencies and its Joint
Radiation Emergency Management Plan of the International Organizations are examples of
such coordination.

12

TABLE 1. EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS CATEGORIES (cont.)
Category

Description

I

Facilities, such as nuclear power plants, for which on-site eventsa, b (including
those not considered in the designc) are postulated that could give rise to severe
deterministic effectsd off the site that would warrant precautionary urgent
protective actions, urgent protective actions or early protective actions, and
other response actions to achieve the goals of emergency response in accordance
with international standardse, or for which such events have occurred in similar
facilities.

II

Facilities, such as some types of research reactor and nuclear reactors used to
provide power for the propulsion of vessels (e.g. ships and submarines),
for which on-site eventsa, b are postulated that could give rise to doses to people
off the site that would warrant urgent protective actions or early protective
actions and other response actions to achieve the goals of emergency response in
accordance with international standardse, or for which such events have occurred
in similar facilities. Category II (as opposed to category I) does not include
facilities for which on-site events (including those not considered in the design)
are postulated that could give rise to severe deterministic effects off the site,
or for which such events have occurred in similar facilities.

III

Facilities, such as industrial irradiation facilities or some hospitals, for which
on-site eventsb are postulated that could warrant protective actions and other
response actions on the site to achieve the goals of emergency response in
accordance with international standardse, or for which such events have occurred
in similar facilities. Category III (as opposed to category II) does not include
facilities for which events are postulated that could warrant urgent protective
actions or early protective actions off the site, or for which such events have
occurred in similar facilities.

IV

Activities and acts that could give rise to a nuclear or radiological emergency
that could warrant protective actions and other response actions to achieve the
goals of emergency response in accordance with international standardse in an
unforeseen location. These activities and acts include: (a) transport of nuclear or
radioactive material and other authorized activities involving mobile dangerous
sources such as industrial radiography sources, nuclear powered satellites or
radioisotope thermoelectric generators; and (b) theft of a dangerous source and
use of a radiological dispersal device or radiological exposure devicef. This
category also includes: (i) detection of elevated radiation levels of unknown
origin or of commodities with contamination; (ii) identification of clinical
symptoms due to exposure to radiation; and (iii) a transnational emergency
that is not in category V arising from a nuclear or radiological emergency in
another State. Category IV represents a level of hazard that applies for all
States and jurisdictions.
Please see table notes on following page

13

TABLE 1. EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS CATEGORIES (cont.)
Category

Areas within emergency planning zones and emergency planning distancesg in a
State for a facility in category I or II located in another State.

V
a

b
c

d
e
f

g

Description

That is, on-site events involving an atmospheric or aquatic release of radioactive material,
or external exposure (due, for example, to a loss of shielding or a criticality event), that
originates from a location on the site.
Such events include nuclear security events.
This includes events that are beyond the design basis accidents and, as appropriate,
conditions that are beyond design extension conditions.
See ‘deterministic effect’ under Definitions.
See the goals of emergency response in para. 3.2 and the generic criteria in Appendix II.
A radiological dispersal device is a device to spread radioactive material using conventional
explosives or other means. A radiation exposure device is a device with radioactive
material designed to intentionally expose members of the public to radiation. They could be
fabricated, modified or improvised devices.
See para. 5.38.

4.20. The government shall ensure that for facilities and activities, a hazard
assessment on the basis of a graded approach is performed. The hazard assessment
shall include consideration of:
(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)

14

Events that could affect the facility or activity, including events of very low
probability and events not considered in the design;
Events involving a combination of a nuclear or radiological emergency with
a conventional emergency such as an emergency following an earthquake,
a volcanic eruption, a tropical cyclone, severe weather, a tsunami, an aircraft
crash or civil disturbances that could affect wide areas and/or could impair
capabilities to provide support in the emergency response;
Events that could affect several facilities and activities concurrently, as well
as consideration of the interactions between the facilities and activities
affected;
Events at facilities in other States or events involving activities
in other States.

4.21. The government shall ensure that the hazard assessment identifies those
facilities and locations at which there is a significant likelihood of encountering
a dangerous source that is not under control.8
4.22. The government shall ensure that the hazard assessment includes
consideration of the results of threat assessments made for nuclear security
purposes [9–11].9
4.23. In the hazard assessment, facilities and activities, on-site areas, off-site
areas and locations shall be identified for which a nuclear or radiological
emergency could — with account taken of the uncertainties in and limitations
of the information available — warrant any of the following:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Precautionary urgent protective actions to avoid or to minimize severe
deterministic effects by keeping doses below levels approaching the generic
criteria at which urgent protective actions and other response actions are
required to be undertaken under any circumstances, with account taken
of Appendix II;
Urgent protective actions and other response actions to avoid or to minimize
severe deterministic effects and to reduce the risk of stochastic effects, with
account taken of Appendix II;
Early protective actions and other response actions, with account taken
of Appendix II;
Other emergency response actions such as longer term medical actions,
with account taken of Appendix II, and emergency response actions aimed
at enabling the termination of the emergency (see Requirement 18); or
Protection of emergency workers in accordance with Requirement 11 and
with account taken of Appendix I.

8

Examples of such facilities and locations are: scrap metal processing facilities, border
crossing points, seaports, airports and abandoned military facilities or other facilities where
dangerous sources might have been used in the past.
9
This includes consideration of ‘strategic locations’, i.e. locations of high security
interest in the State which are potential targets for attacks using nuclear and other radioactive
material and locations for detection of nuclear and other radioactive material that is out of
regulatory control, in line with Ref. [11].

15

4.24. The government shall ensure that the hazard assessment also identifies
non-radiation-related hazards10 to people on the site and off the site that are
associated with the facility or activity and that may impair the effectiveness
of the response actions to be taken.
4.25. The government shall ensure that a review of the hazard assessment
is performed periodically with the aims of: (a) ensuring that all facilities and
activities, on-site areas, off-site areas and locations where events could occur that
would necessitate protective actions and other response actions are identified, and
(b) taking into account any changes in the hazards within the State and beyond its
borders, any changes in assessments of threats for nuclear security purposes, the
experience and lessons from research, operation and emergency exercises, and
technological developments (see paras 6.30, 6.36 and 6.38). The results of this
review shall be used to revise the emergency arrangements as necessary.
4.26. The government through the regulatory body shall ensure that operating
organizations review appropriately and, as necessary, revise the emergency
arrangements (a) prior to any changes in the facility or activity that affect the
existing hazard assessment and (b) when new information becomes available that
provides insights into the adequacy of the existing arrangements.11
Requirement 5: Protection strategy for a nuclear or radiological emergency
The government shall ensure that protection strategies are developed,
justified and optimized at the preparedness stage for taking protective actions
and other response actions effectively in a nuclear or radiological emergency.
4.27. The government shall ensure that, on the basis of the hazards identified
and the potential consequences of a nuclear or radiological emergency, protection
strategies are developed, justified and optimized at the preparedness stage for
taking protective actions and other response actions effectively in a nuclear
or radiological emergency to achieve the goals of emergency response.

10

Examples of non-radiation-related hazards are the release of toxic chemicals,
e.g. uranium hexafluoride (UF6), fires, explosions and floods.
11
Examples of such changes and available information include the movement of
irradiated nuclear fuel to a new location, projected flooding, and information on storms or other
meteorological hazards.

16

4.28. Development of a protection strategy shall include, but shall not be limited
to, the following:
(1)

(2)

(3)

Consideration shall be given to actions to be taken to avoid or to minimize
severe deterministic effects and to reduce the risk of stochastic effects.
Deterministic effects shall be evaluated on the basis of relative biological
effectiveness (RBE) weighted absorbed dose to a tissue or organ. Stochastic
effects in a tissue or organ shall be evaluated on the basis of equivalent
dose to the tissue or organ. The detriment associated with the occurrence
of stochastic effects in individuals in an exposed population shall
be evaluated on the basis of the effective dose.
A reference level expressed in terms of residual dose shall be set, typically
as an effective dose in the range 20–100 mSv, acute or annual, that includes
dose contributions via all exposure pathways. This reference level shall
be used in conjunction with the goals of emergency response (see para. 3.2)
and the specific time frame in which particular goals are to be achieved.12
On the basis of the outcome of the justification and the optimization of the
protection strategy, national generic criteria for taking protective actions
and other response actions, expressed in terms of projected dose or of
dose that has been received, shall be developed with account taken of the
generic criteria in Appendix II. If the national generic criteria for projected
dose or received dose are exceeded, protective actions and other response
actions, either individually or in combination, shall be implemented.

12

The application solely of the reference level for effective dose would not be sufficient
to develop the protection strategy. Consideration needs to be given to the particular goal to be
met in the response, the time to allow for actions to be taken effectively, and the appropriate
dose quantity to be used to ensure that organ doses will be kept below those at which protective
actions and other response actions are justified (see para. 4.28 (1)). For example, actions to
avoid or to minimize severe deterministic effects are to be taken urgently when projected
doses expected to be received within a short period of time exceed those given in Table II.1 of
Appendix II for the RBE weighted absorbed dose to a tissue or organ. In this case, if such doses
are received, then prompt and appropriate medical actions are necessary. Moreover, selection
of a particular value (to be used for optimization purposes and for retrospective assessment
of the effectiveness of actions and strategy taken) within the proposed range of 20–100 mSv
acute or annual effective dose would depend on the phase of the emergency, the practicality of
reducing or preventing exposures, and other factors. In the urgent phase of an emergency, an
effective dose of 100 mSv, acute or annual, might be justified as one of the dosimetric bases
for implementing and optimizing a protection strategy. In the later phases, such as during the
transition, an effective dose of 20 mSv per year may be justified as one of the dosimetric bases
for implementing and optimizing a protection strategy to enable the transition to an existing
exposure situation to be made.

17

(4)

Once the protection strategy has been justified and optimized and a set
of national generic criteria has been developed, pre-established operational
criteria (conditions on the site, emergency action levels (EALs) and
operational intervention levels (OILs)) for initiating the different parts
of an emergency plan and for taking protective actions and other response
actions shall be derived from the generic criteria13. Arrangements shall
be established in advance to revise these operational criteria, as appropriate,
in the course of a nuclear or radiological emergency, with account taken
of the prevailing conditions as they evolve.

4.29. Each protective action, in the context of the protection strategy, and the
protection strategy itself shall be demonstrated to be justified (i.e. to do more
good than harm), with account taken not only of those detriments that are
associated with radiation exposure but also of those detriments associated
with impacts of the actions taken on public health14, the economy, society and
the environment.
4.30. The government shall ensure that interested parties are involved and are
consulted, as appropriate, in the development of the protection strategy.
4.31. The government shall ensure that the protection strategy is implemented
safely and effectively in an emergency response through the implementation
of emergency arrangements, including but not limited to:
(a)

(b)
(c)
(d)

Promptly taking urgent protective actions and other response actions with
account taken of Appendix II to avoid or to minimize severe deterministic
effects, if possible, on the basis of observed conditions and before any
exposure occurs;
Taking early protective actions and other response actions to reduce the risk
of stochastic effects with account taken of Appendix II;
Providing for registration, health screening and longer term medical
follow-up, as appropriate, with account taken of Appendix II;
Taking actions to protect emergency workers, with account taken
of guidance values provided in Appendix I;

13

The operational criteria (i.e. operational intervention levels) need to be derived
for a representative person with account taken of those members of the public that are most
vulnerable to radiation exposure (i.e. pregnant women and children).
14
Examples of such impacts include possible deaths among patients evacuated without
the necessary medical care and possible reduced life expectancy due to resettlement.

18

(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)

Taking actions to mitigate non-radiological consequences, with account
taken of Appendix II;
Assessing the effectiveness of the actions taken and adjusting them
as appropriate on the basis of prevailing conditions and available information
as well as the reference level expressed in terms of residual dose;
Revising the protection strategy as necessary and its further implementation;
Discontinuing protective actions and other response actions when they are
no longer justified.

5. FUNCTIONAL REQUIREMENTS
GENERAL

5.1. The requirements established in this section address the functions that are
essential for the emergency response in a nuclear or radiological emergency to be
effective and for achieving the goals of emergency response (see para. 3.2).
Requirement 6: Managing operations in an emergency response
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place for
operations in response to a nuclear or radiological emergency to be
appropriately managed.
5.2. For facilities in categories I, II and III, arrangements shall be made for
the on-site emergency response to be promptly executed and managed without
impairing the performance of the continuing operational safety and security
functions both at the facility and at any other facilities on the same site. The
transition from normal operations to operations under emergency conditions
on the site shall be clearly specified and shall be effectively made. The
responsibilities of all personnel who would be on the site in an emergency shall
be designated as part of the arrangements for this transition. It shall be ensured that
the transition to the emergency response and the performance of initial response
actions do not impair the ability of operating personnel (such as operating
personnel in the control room) to ensure safe and secure operation while taking
mitigatory actions.

19

5.3. For facilities in categories I, II and III, and, where appropriate, for activities
in category IV, arrangements shall be made for an off-site emergency response
to be promptly executed, effectively managed and coordinated with an on-site
emergency response.
5.4. For a site where several facilities in categories I and II are collocated,
adequate arrangements shall be made to manage the emergency response at all
the facilities if each of them is under emergency conditions simultaneously. This
shall include arrangements to manage the deployment of and the protection
of personnel responding on and off the site (see Requirement 11).
5.5. For facilities and activities in categories I, II, III and IV, arrangements have
to be made, as far as practicable, so that the facility or activity has a nuclear
security system or systems [9–11] that would be functional in a nuclear
or radiological emergency.
5.6. Arrangements for response to a nuclear or radiological emergency shall
be coordinated and integrated with arrangements at the local, regional and
national levels for response to a conventional emergency and to a nuclear security
event.15 These arrangements shall take into consideration the fact that the initiator
of the nuclear or radiological emergency may not be known early in the response.
5.7. Arrangements shall be made for the establishment and use of a clearly
specified and unified command and control system for emergency response
under the all-hazards approach as part of the emergency management system
(see paras 4.1–4.3). The command and control system shall provide sufficient
assurance for effective coordination of the on-site and off-site response. The
authority and responsibility for directing the emergency response and for making
decisions on emergency response actions to be taken shall be clearly assigned.
The responsibility for directing the emergency response and for decision
making on emergency response actions to be taken shall be promptly discharged
following a notification of an emergency.

15

The coordination and integration of arrangements for response to a nuclear or
radiological emergency with arrangements for response to a nuclear security event includes
coordination with and integration of arrangements for response measures such as identification,
collection, packaging and transport of evidence contaminated with radionuclides, nuclear
forensics and related activities in the context of an investigation into the circumstances
surrounding a nuclear security event.

20

5.8. Arrangements shall be made for obtaining and assessing the information
necessary for making decisions on the allocation of resources for all response
organizations throughout a nuclear or radiological emergency.
5.9. For facilities in category I or II and areas in category V, arrangements shall
be made for coordinating the emergency response between response organizations
(including those of other States) within the emergency planning zones and
emergency planning distances (see para. 5.38) and for providing mutual support.
5.10. Arrangements shall be made with other States, as appropriate, for
coordinated response to a radiological emergency.
Requirement 7: Identifying and notifying a nuclear or radiological
emergency and activating an emergency response
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place for the prompt
identification and notification of a nuclear or radiological emergency and
for the activation of an emergency response.
5.11. An off-site notification point16, or more than one, shall be established
to receive notification of an actual or potential nuclear or radiological emergency.
The notification point(s) shall be maintained in a state of continuous availability
to receive any notification or request for support and to respond promptly, or to
initiate a preplanned and coordinated off-site emergency response appropriate
to the emergency class or the level of emergency response. The notification
point(s) shall be able to initiate immediate communication by suitable, reliable
and diverse means with the response organizations that are providing support.
5.12. For facilities in categories I and II and for areas in category V, the
notification point shall be able to initiate immediate communication with the
authority that has been assigned the responsibility to decide on and to initiate
precautionary urgent protective actions and urgent protective actions off the site
(see also para. 5.7).
5.13. For facilities and locations at which there is a significant likelihood
of encountering a dangerous source that is not under control (see para. 4.21),
arrangements shall be made to ensure that the on-site managers of operations and
16

This may be the notification point used to receive notification of and to initiate
an off-site emergency response to an emergency of any type (conventional, or nuclear or
radiological).

21

other personnel are aware of the indicators of a potential radiological emergency,
the appropriate notification, and protective actions and other response actions that
are immediately warranted in an emergency. For facilities and locations for which
there is a significant likelihood of encountering a dangerous source that is not
under control and for an emergency at an unforeseen location, arrangements shall
be made to ensure that the local officials responsible for the response and first
responders are aware of the indicators of a potential radiological emergency, the
appropriate notification, and protective actions and other response actions that
are warranted to be taken immediately in an emergency.
5.14. The operating organization of a facility or activity in category I, II, III or IV
shall make arrangements for promptly classifying, on the basis of the hazard
assessment, a nuclear or radiological emergency warranting protective actions
and other response actions to protect workers, emergency workers, members
of the public and, as relevant, patients and helpers in an emergency, in accordance
with the protection strategy (see Requirement 5). This shall include a system for
classifying all types of nuclear or radiological emergency17 as follows:
(a)

(b)

(c)

General emergency at facilities in category I or II for an emergency that
warrants taking precautionary urgent protective actions, urgent protective
actions, and early protective actions and other response actions on the site
and off the site. Upon declaration of this emergency class, appropriate
actions shall promptly be taken, on the basis of the available information
relating to the emergency, to mitigate the consequences of the emergency
on the site and to protect people on the site and off the site.
Site area emergency at facilities in category I or II for an emergency that
warrants taking protective actions and other response actions on the site
and in the vicinity of the site. Upon declaration of this emergency class,
actions shall promptly be taken: (i) to mitigate the consequences of the
emergency on the site and to protect people on the site; (ii) to increase the
readiness to take protective actions and other response actions off the site
if this becomes necessary on the basis of observable conditions, reliable
assessments and/or results of monitoring; and (iii) to conduct off-site
monitoring, sampling and analysis.
Facility emergency at facilities in category I, II or III for an emergency that
warrants taking protective actions and other response actions at the facility
and on the site but does not warrant taking protective actions off the site.

17

The emergency classes may differ from those specified in (a)–(e) provided that
emergencies of all these types are included.

22

(d)

(e)

Upon declaration of this emergency class, actions shall promptly be taken
to mitigate the consequences of the emergency and to protect people
at the facility and on the site. Emergencies in this class do not present
an off-site hazard.
Alert at facilities in category I, II or III for an event that warrants taking
actions to assess and to mitigate the potential consequences at the facility.
Upon declaration of this emergency class, actions shall promptly be taken
to assess and to mitigate the potential consequences of the event and
to increase the readiness of the on-site response organizations.
Other nuclear or radiological emergency18 for an emergency
in category IV that warrants taking protective actions and other response
actions at any location. Upon declaration of this emergency class and the
level of emergency response, actions shall promptly be taken to mitigate the
consequences of the emergency on the site, to protect those in the vicinity
(e.g. workers and emergency workers and the public) and to determine
where and for whom protective actions and other response actions
are warranted.

5.15. For facilities in category I, II or III and for category IV, arrangements
shall be made to review the declared emergency class in the light of any new
information and, as appropriate, to revise it.
5.16. The emergency classification system for facilities and activities
in categories I, II, III and IV shall take into account all postulated emergencies,
including those arising from events of very low probability. The operational
criteria for classification shall include emergency action levels and other
observable conditions (i.e. ‘observables’) and indicators of the conditions at the
facility and/or on the site or off the site. The emergency classification system
shall be established with the aim of allowing for the prompt initiation of an
effective response in recognition of the uncertainty of the available information.
It shall be ensured that any process for rating an event on the International
Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale (INES) [15] does not delay the emergency
classification or emergency response actions.19
18

This class covers broad types of emergency (see Table 1 and paras 4.21 and 4.22).
A graded approach may need to be taken when postulating emergencies and expected
consequences within this class in order to determine the level of emergency response warranted.
19
The emergency classification system is not to be confused with the INES. The INES
is a scale developed for use by States solely for the purpose of communicating with the public
on the safety significance of events associated with sources of radiation. The INES is not to be
used as a basis for emergency response actions.

23

5.17. For facilities and activities in categories I, II and III, and for category IV,
arrangements shall be made: (1) to promptly recognize and classify a nuclear
or radiological emergency; (2) upon classification, to promptly declare the
emergency class and to initiate a coordinated and preplanned on-site response;
(3) to notify the appropriate notification point (see para. 5.11) and to provide
sufficient information for an effective off-site response; and (4) upon notification,
to initiate a coordinated and preplanned off-site response, as appropriate,
in accordance with the protection strategy. These arrangements shall include
suitable, reliable and diverse means of warning persons on the site, of notifying
the notification point (see paras 5.41–5.43, 6.22 and 6.34) and of communication
between response organizations.
5.18. In the event of a transnational emergency, the notifying State shall promptly
notify20,21 the IAEA of the emergency and, either directly or through the IAEA,
those States that could be affected by it. The notifying State shall provide
information on the nature of the emergency and on its potential transnational
consequences, and shall respond to requests from other States and from the IAEA
for information for the purposes of mitigating any consequences.
5.19. The State shall make known to the IAEA and to other States, directly
or through the IAEA, its single warning point responsible for receiving emergency
notifications and information from other States and information from the IAEA.
This warning point shall be maintained in a state of continuous availability
to receive any notification, request for assistance or request for verification and
to promptly initiate a response or verification. The State shall promptly inform the
IAEA and shall inform other States, directly or through the IAEA, of any changes
that occur in respect of the warning point. The State shall make arrangements for
promptly notifying and for providing relevant information, directly or through
the IAEA, to those States that could be affected by a transnational emergency.
5.20. The notifying State shall have arrangements in place for promptly
responding to requests from other States or from the IAEA for information
in respect of a transnational emergency, in particular with regard to minimizing
20

Such a notification is in accordance with the State’s obligations under the general
principles and rules of international law and, for the case of a transboundary release that could
be of radiological safety significance for another State, it is in accordance with the Early
Notification Convention [13].
21
A transnational emergency that is considered to represent a public health emergency of
international concern may also be expected to be notified in accordance with the International
Health Regulations [16].

24

any consequences. These arrangements shall include making known to the IAEA
and to other States, directly or through the IAEA, the notifying State’s designated
organization(s) for so doing.
5.21. Arrangements shall be made for promptly and directly notifying any
State within the emergency planning zones and emergency planning distances
(see para. 5.38) within which urgent protective actions and early protective
actions and other response actions could be required to be taken.
5.22. Appropriate emergency response actions shall be initiated in a timely
manner upon the receipt of a notification from another State or of information
from the IAEA on a notification relating to an actual or potential transnational
emergency that could have impacts on the State or its nationals.
Requirement 8: Taking mitigatory actions
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place for taking
mitigatory actions in a nuclear or radiological emergency.
5.23. The operating organization of a facility or activity in category I, II, III
or IV shall promptly decide on and take actions22 on the site that are necessary
to mitigate the consequences of a nuclear or radiological emergency involving
a facility or an activity under its responsibility.
5.24. Off-site emergency services shall be made available for the purpose of, and
shall be capable of, supporting the on-site emergency response at facilities and
activities in category I, II, III or IV.23
5.25. For facilities in category I, II or III, arrangements shall be made for
mitigatory actions to be taken by the operating personnel, in particular:
(a)
(b)

To prevent escalation of an emergency;
To return the facility to a safe and stable state;

22

Such actions may include actions with off-site consequences such as discharge of
radioactive material to the environment, provided that the appropriate off-site organizations are
notified in advance.
23
This is not to be understood as diminishing the responsibility of the operating
organization to have adequate capabilities to respond to an emergency arising in the facility or
activity under its responsibility.

25

(c)

To reduce the potential for, and to mitigate the consequences of, radioactive
releases or exposures.

These arrangements shall take into account the full range of possible conditions
affecting the emergency response, including those resulting from conditions in the
facility and those resulting from impacts of postulated natural, human induced
or other events and affecting regional infrastructure or affecting several facilities
simultaneously. Arrangements shall include emergency operating procedures
and guidance for operating personnel on mitigatory actions for severe conditions
(for a nuclear power plant, as part of the accident management programme [17])
and for the full range of postulated emergencies, including accidents that are not
considered in the design and associated conditions. As far as practicable, the
continued functionality of nuclear security system(s) (see Refs [9–11]) needs
to be considered in these arrangements.
5.26. The operating organization of a facility or activity in category I, II, III
or IV shall assess and determine, at the preparedness stage, when and under what
conditions assistance from off-site emergency services may need to be provided
on the site, consistent with the hazard assessment and the protection strategy.23
5.27. For facilities in category I, II or III, arrangements shall be made,
in particular by the operating organization, to provide technical assistance
to the operating personnel. On-site teams for mitigating the consequences
of an emergency (e.g. damage control, firefighting) shall be available and shall
be prepared to perform actions at the facility. Paragraph 5.15 of Safety of Nuclear
Power Plants: Design (SSR-2/1) [18] states that:
“Any equipment that is necessary for actions to be taken in manual response
and recovery processes shall be placed at the most suitable location
to ensure its availability at the time of need and to allow safe access to it
under the environmental conditions anticipated.”
The operating personnel directing mitigatory actions shall be provided with
information and technical assistance to allow them to take actions effectively
to mitigate the consequences of the emergency. Arrangements shall be made
to obtain support promptly from the emergency services (e.g. law enforcement
agencies, medical services and firefighting services) off the site. Off-site
emergency services shall be afforded prompt access to the facility, and shall
be informed of on-site conditions and provided with instructions and with means
for protecting themselves as emergency workers.

26

5.28. Arrangements shall be made for the operating organization of an activity
in category IV, first responders in an emergency at an unforeseen location, and
those personnel at locations where there is a significant likelihood of encountering
a dangerous source that is not under control (see para. 4.21) to take promptly
all practicable and appropriate actions to mitigate the consequences of a nuclear
or radiological emergency. These arrangements shall include providing basic
instructions and training in the means of mitigating the potential consequences
of a nuclear or radiological emergency (see para. 5.44).
5.29. Arrangements shall be made to provide expertise and services in radiation
protection promptly to local officials, first responders in an emergency at an
unforeseen location and specialized services (e.g. law enforcement agencies)
responding to emergencies involving activities and acts in category IV,
and to those personnel at locations where there is a significant likelihood
of encountering a dangerous source that is not under control (see para. 4.21).
This shall include arrangements for on-call advice or other appropriate
mechanisms and arrangements to dispatch to the site an emergency team
capable of assessing radiation hazards, mitigating radiological consequences and
managing the exposure of emergency workers. In addition, arrangements shall
be made to determine whether and when additional assistance is necessary and
to determine how to obtain such assistance (see paras 5.24 and 5.94).
5.30. Arrangements shall be made to initiate a prompt search in the event that
a dangerous source could possibly be in the public domain as a result of its loss
or unauthorized removal (see para. 5.47).
Requirement 9: Taking urgent protective actions and other response actions
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place to assess
emergency conditions and to take urgent protective actions and other
response actions effectively in a nuclear or radiological emergency.
5.31. Arrangements shall be made so that the magnitudes of hazards and
the possible development of hazardous conditions are assessed initially and
throughout a nuclear or radiological emergency in order to promptly identify,
characterize or anticipate, as appropriate, new hazards or the extent of hazards
and to revise the protection strategy.

27

5.32. The operating organization of a facility in category I, II or III shall make
arrangements to promptly assess and anticipate:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

Abnormal conditions at the facility;
Exposures and radioactive releases and releases of other hazardous material;
Radiological conditions on the site and, as appropriate, off the site;
Any exposures or potential exposures of workers and emergency workers,
the public and, as relevant, patients and helpers in an emergency.

5.33. These assessments as stated in para. 5.32 shall be used:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

For deciding on mitigatory actions to be taken by the operating personnel;
As a basis for emergency classification (see para. 5.14);
For deciding on protective actions and other response actions
to be taken on the site, including those for the protection of workers and
emergency workers;
For deciding on protective actions and other response actions to be taken
off the site;
Where appropriate, to identify those individuals who could potentially have
been exposed on the site at levels requiring appropriate medical attention
in accordance with Appendix II.

5.34. These arrangements as stated in para. 5.32 shall include the use
of pre-established operational criteria in accordance with the protection
strategy (see para. 4.28(4)) and provision for access to instruments displaying
or measuring those parameters that can readily be measured or observed in a
nuclear or radiological emergency. In these arrangements, the expected response
of instrumentation and of structures, systems and components at the facility
under emergency conditions shall be taken into account.
5.35. The operating organization for activities in category IV shall make
arrangements to assess promptly the extent and/or the significance of any
abnormal conditions on the site, any exposures or any contamination. These
assessments shall be used:
(a)
(b)
(c)

28

For initiating the mitigatory actions;
As a basis for protective actions and other response actions to be taken
on the site;
For determining the level for emergency response and for communicating
the extent of the hazards to the appropriate off-site response organizations.

These arrangements shall include the use of pre-established operational criteria
in accordance with the protection strategy (see para. 4.28(4)).
5.36. Arrangements shall be made such that information on emergency
conditions, assessments and protective actions and other response actions that
have been recommended and have been taken is promptly made available,
as appropriate, to all relevant response organizations and to the IAEA throughout
the emergency.
5.37. Arrangements shall be made for actions to save human life or to prevent
serious injury to be taken without any delay on the grounds of the possible
presence of radioactive material (see paras 5.39 and 5.64). These arrangements
shall include providing first responders in an emergency at an unforeseen location
with information on the precautions to take in giving first aid or in transporting
an individual with possible contamination.
5.38. For facilities in category I or II, arrangements shall be made for effectively
making decisions on and taking urgent protective actions, early protective actions
and other response actions24 off the site in order to achieve the goals of emergency
response, on the basis of a graded approach and in accordance with the protection
strategy. The arrangements shall be made with account taken of the uncertainties
in and limitations of the information available when protective actions and other
response actions have to be taken to be effective, and shall include the following:
(a)

The specification of off-site emergency planning zones and emergency
planning distances25 for which arrangements shall be made at the
preparedness stage for taking protective actions and other response actions
effectively. These emergency planning zones and emergency planning
24

Although defined under this overarching requirement, emergency planning zones
and emergency planning distances are applicable for both urgent protective actions and early
protective actions and other response actions. Within emergency planning zones, the main
focus is on taking precautionary urgent protective actions, urgent protective actions and other
response actions. However, within emergency planning distances, urgent decisions may be
warranted, as a precaution, to prevent inadvertent ingestion and to restrict the consumption
of food, milk and drinking water that could be directly contaminated following a significant
release of radioactive material to the environment and then consumed.
25
The off-site emergency planning zones and emergency planning distances may differ
from those specified provided that, at the preparedness stage, such areas and distances are
designated and arrangements are made to effectively take precautionary urgent protective
actions, urgent protective actions and early protective actions and other response actions within
these areas and distances in order to achieve the goals of emergency response.

29

distances shall be contiguous across national borders, where appropriate,
and shall include:
(i) A precautionary action zone (PAZ), for facilities in category I, for
which arrangements shall be made for taking urgent protective
actions and other response actions, before any significant
release26 of radioactive material occurs, on the basis of conditions
at the facility (i.e. conditions leading to the declaration of a general
emergency; see para. 5.14), in order to avoid or to minimize severe
deterministic effects.
(ii) An urgent protective action planning zone (UPZ), for facilities
in category I or II, for which arrangements shall be made to initiate
urgent protective actions and other response actions, if possible before
any significant release of radioactive material occurs, on the basis
of conditions at the facility (i.e. conditions leading to the declaration
of a general emergency; see para. 5.14), and after a release occurs,
on the basis of monitoring and assessment of the radiological situation
off the site, in order to reduce the risk of stochastic effects.27 Any such
actions shall be taken in such a way as not to delay the implementation
of precautionary urgent protective actions and other response actions
within the precautionary action zone.
(iii) An extended planning distance (EPD) from the facility, for facilities
in category I or II (beyond the urgent protective action planning zone),
for which arrangements shall be made to conduct monitoring and
assessment of the radiological situation off the site in order to identify
areas, within a period of time that would allow the risk of stochastic
effects in the areas to be effectively reduced by taking protective
actions and other response actions within a day to a week or to a few
weeks following a significant radioactive release.
(iv) An ingestion and commodities planning distance (ICPD) from the
facility, for facilities in category I or II (beyond the extended planning
distance), for which arrangements shall be made to take response

26

A significant release of radioactive material is a radioactive release that could lead
to severe deterministic effects off the site and thus warrants taking protective actions or other
response actions off the site.
27
Taking actions within the urgent protective action planning zone in order to reduce the
risk of stochastic effects would not mean that no severe deterministic effects could possibly be
observed within the urgent protective action planning zone. However, any severe deterministic
effects are most likely to occur within the precautionary action zone.

30

(b)

(c)

actions (1) for protecting the food chain and water supply28 as well
as for protecting commodities other than food from contamination
following a significant radioactive release and (2) for protecting the
public from the ingestion of food, milk and drinking water and from
the use of commodities other than food with possible contamination
following a significant radioactive release.
Criteria, based on the emergency classification and on conditions at the
facility and off the site (see paras 4.28(3), 4.28(4), 5.14 and 5.15), for
initiating and for adjusting urgent protective actions and other response
actions within the emergency planning zones and emergency planning
distances, in accordance with the protection strategy.
Authority and responsibility to provide sufficient and updated information
to the notification point at any time to allow for an effective off-site
emergency response.

5.39. Within the emergency planning zones and emergency planning distances,
arrangements shall be made for taking appropriate protective actions and other
response actions effectively, as necessary, promptly upon the notification
of a nuclear or radiological emergency. These arrangements shall include
arrangements for:
(a)
(b)
(c)

(d)

Prompt exercise of authority and discharge of responsibility for making
decisions to initiate protective actions and other response actions upon
notification of an emergency (see para. 5.12);
Warning the permanent population, transient population groups and
special population groups or those responsible for them and warning
special facilities;
Taking urgent protective actions and other response actions such
as evacuation, restrictions on the food chain and on water supply, prevention
of inadvertent ingestion, restrictions on the consumption of food, milk
and drinking water and on the use of commodities, decontamination
of evacuees, control of access and traffic restrictions;
Protection of emergency workers and helpers in an emergency.

The arrangements shall be coordinated with all jurisdictions (including, to the
extent practicable, jurisdictions beyond national borders, where relevant) within
any emergency planning zone or distance. These arrangements shall ensure

28

water.

‘Water supply’ refers to water supplies that use rainwater or other untreated surface

31

that services necessary for ensuring public safety (e.g. rescue services and
health services for the care of critically ill patients) are provided continuously
throughout the emergency, including during the period when protective actions
and other response actions are being taken.
5.40. Within emergency planning zones and emergency planning distances,
arrangements shall be made for the timely monitoring and assessment
of contamination, radioactive releases and exposures for the purpose of deciding
on or adjusting the protective actions and other response actions that have
to be taken or that are being taken. These arrangements shall include the use
of pre-established operational criteria in accordance with the protection strategy
(see para. 4.28(4)).
5.41. The operating organization of a facility in category I, II or III shall
make arrangements to ensure protection and safety for all persons on the site
in a nuclear or radiological emergency. These shall include arrangements to do
the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

To notify all persons on the site of an emergency on the site;
For all persons on the site to take appropriate actions immediately upon
notification of an emergency;
To account for those persons on the site and to locate and recover those
persons unaccounted for;
To provide immediate first aid;
To take urgent protective actions.

5.42. Arrangements as stated in para. 5.41 shall also include ensuring the
provision, for all persons present in the facility and on the site, of:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Suitable assembly points, provided with continuous radiation monitoring;
A sufficient number of suitable escape routes;
Suitable and reliable alarm systems and other means for warning and
instructing all persons present under the full range of emergency conditions.

5.43. The operating organization of a facility in category I, II or III shall ensure
that suitable, reliable and diverse means of communication are available at all
times, under the full range of emergency conditions, for use in taking protective
actions and other response actions on the site and for communication with off-site
officials responsible for taking protective actions and other response actions off
the site or within any emergency planning zones or emergency planning distances.

32

5.44. Operating personnel for activities in category IV, first responders in an
emergency at an unforeseen location and those personnel at locations where there
is a significant likelihood of encountering a dangerous source that is not under
control (see para. 4.21) shall be provided with guidance and training on taking
urgent protective actions and other response actions. This shall include guidance
and training on the approximate radius of the inner cordoned off area in which
urgent protective actions and other response actions would initially be taken and
on the adjustment of this area on the basis of observed or assessed conditions
on the site.
Requirement 10: Providing instructions, warnings and relevant information
to the public for emergency preparedness and response
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place to provide the
public who are affected or are potentially affected by a nuclear or radiological
emergency with information that is necessary for their protection, to warn
them promptly and to instruct them on actions to be taken.
5.45. For facilities in category I or II and areas in category V, arrangements shall
be made to provide the permanent population, transient population groups and
special population groups or those responsible for them and special facilities
within the emergency planning zones and emergency planning distances
(see para. 5.38), before operation and throughout the lifetime of the facility,
with information on the response to a nuclear or radiological emergency.
This information shall include information on the potential for a nuclear
or radiological emergency, on the nature of the hazards, on how people would
be warned or notified, and on the actions to be taken in such an emergency. The
information shall be provided in the languages mainly spoken by the population
residing within the emergency planning zones and emergency planning
distances. The effectiveness of these arrangements for public information shall
be periodically assessed.
5.46. For facilities in category I or II and in areas in category V, arrangements
shall be made to register those members of the public in special population
groups and, as appropriate, those responsible for them, and to promptly issue
them and the permanent population and transient population groups, as well
as special facilities in the emergency planning zones and emergency planning
distances, with a warning and with instructions to be followed upon declaration
of a general emergency (see para. 5.14). This shall include providing instructions
on the actions to be taken in the languages mainly spoken by the population

33

residing within these emergency planning zones and emergency planning
distances (see para. 5.38).
5.47. For facilities in category III and category IV, arrangements shall be made
to provide the public with information and instructions in order to identify
and locate people who may have been affected by a nuclear or radiological
emergency and who may need response actions such as decontamination, medical
examination or health screening. These arrangements shall include arrangements
for issuing a warning to the public and providing information in the event that
a dangerous source could be in the public domain as a consequence of its loss
or unauthorized removal.
5.48. Arrangements shall be made by response organizations in a State
to promptly provide information and advice to its nationals and to those people
with interests in other States29 in the event of a nuclear or radiological emergency
declared beyond national borders, with due account taken of the response actions
recommended in the State in which the emergency occurs as well as in the
State(s) affected by that emergency (see paras 5.73 and 6.14).
Requirement 11: Protecting emergency workers and helpers in an emergency
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place to protect
emergency workers and to protect helpers in a nuclear or radiological
emergency.
5.49. Arrangements shall be made to ensure that emergency workers are, to the
extent practicable, designated in advance and are fit for the intended duty. These
arrangements shall include health surveillance for emergency workers for the
purpose of assessing their initial fitness and continuing fitness for their intended
duties (see also GSR Part 3 [8]).
5.50. Arrangements shall be made to register and to integrate into operations in an
emergency response those emergency workers who were not designated as such
in advance of a nuclear or radiological emergency and helpers in an emergency.
This shall include designation of the response organization(s) responsible
for ensuring protection of emergency workers and protection of helpers
in an emergency.
29

Examples of people with interests in other States include people travelling, people
working and/or living abroad, importers and exporters, and people working in companies
operating abroad.

34

5.51. The operating organization and response organizations shall determine
the anticipated hazardous conditions, both on the site and off the site, in which
emergency workers might have to perform response functions in a nuclear
or radiological emergency in accordance with the hazard assessment and the
protection strategy.
5.52. The operating organization and response organizations shall ensure that
arrangements are in place for the protection of emergency workers and protection
of helpers in an emergency for the range of anticipated hazardous conditions
in which they might have to perform response functions. These arrangements,
as a minimum, shall include:
(a)
(b)

(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

Training those emergency workers designated as such in advance;
Providing emergency workers not designated in advance and helpers in an
emergency immediately before the conduct of their specified duties with
instructions on how to perform the duties under emergency conditions
(‘just in time’ training);
Managing, controlling and recording the doses received;
Provision of appropriate specialized protective equipment and
monitoring equipment;
Provision of iodine thyroid blocking, as appropriate, if exposure due
to radioactive iodine is possible;
Obtaining informed consent to perform specified duties, when appropriate;
Medical examination, longer term medical actions and psychological
counselling, as appropriate.

5.53. The operating organization and response organizations shall ensure that all
practicable means are used to minimize exposures of emergency workers and
helpers in an emergency in the response to a nuclear or radiological emergency
(see para. I.2 of Appendix I), and to optimize their protection.
5.54. In a nuclear or radiological emergency, the relevant requirements for
occupational exposure in planned exposure situations established in GSR Part 3 [8]
shall be applied, on the basis of a graded approach, for emergency workers,
except as required in para. 5.55.

35

5.55. The operating organization and response organizations shall ensure that
no emergency worker is subject to an exposure in an emergency that could give
rise to an effective dose in excess of 50 mSv other than:
(1)
(2)
(3)

For the purposes of saving human life or preventing serious injury;
When taking actions to prevent severe deterministic effects
or actions to prevent the development of catastrophic conditions that could
significantly affect people and the environment;
When taking actions to avert a large collective dose.

5.56. For the exceptional circumstances of para. 5.55, national guidance
values shall be established for restricting the exposures of emergency workers,
in accordance with Appendix I.
5.57. The operating organization and response organizations shall ensure that
emergency workers who undertake emergency response actions in which doses
received might exceed an effective dose of 50 mSv do so voluntarily30; that they
have been clearly and comprehensively informed in advance of associated health
risks as well as of available protective measures; and that they are, to the extent
possible, trained in the actions that they might be required to take. Emergency
workers not designated as such in advance shall not be the first emergency
workers chosen for taking actions that could result in their doses exceeding the
guidance values of dose for lifesaving actions, as given in Appendix I. Helpers
in an emergency shall not be allowed to take actions that could result in their
receiving doses in excess of an effective dose of 50 mSv.
5.58. Arrangements shall be made to assess as soon as practicable the individual
doses received in a response to a nuclear or radiological emergency by emergency
workers and helpers in an emergency and, as appropriate, to restrict further
exposures in the response to the emergency (see Appendix I).
5.59. Emergency workers and helpers in an emergency shall be given appropriate
medical attention for doses received in a response to a nuclear or radiological
emergency (see Appendix II) or at their request.

30

The voluntary basis for response actions by emergency workers is usually covered in
the emergency arrangements.

36

5.60. Emergency workers who receive doses in a response to a nuclear
or radiological emergency shall normally not be precluded from incurring
further occupational exposure. However, qualified medical advice31 shall
be obtained before any further occupational exposure occurs if an emergency
worker has received an effective dose exceeding 200 mSv, or at the request of the
emergency worker.
5.61. Information on the doses received in the response to a nuclear
or radiological emergency and information on any consequent health risks shall
be communicated, as soon as practicable, to emergency workers and to helpers
in an emergency.
Requirement 12: Managing the medical response in a nuclear or radiological
emergency
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place for the
provision of appropriate medical screening and triage, medical treatment
and longer term medical actions for those people who could be affected in a
nuclear or radiological emergency.
5.62. On the presentation by an individual of clinical symptoms of radiation
exposure or other indications associated with a possible nuclear or radiological
emergency, the medical personnel or other responsible parties who identify
the clinical symptoms or other indications shall notify the appropriate local
or national officials and shall take response actions as appropriate.
5.63. Arrangements shall be made for medical personnel, both general
practitioners and emergency medical staff, to be made aware of the clinical
symptoms of radiation exposure, and of the appropriate notification procedures
and other emergency response actions to be taken if a nuclear or radiological
emergency arises or is suspected.
31
Such qualified medical advice is intended for assessing the continuing fitness of
workers for their intended tasks involving occupational exposure in line with GSR Part 3 [8].
In line with para. 5.59 of this Safety Requirements publication, any emergency worker is
to be given appropriate medical attention for doses received. To illustrate this, the generic
criterion for dose that is received (100 mSv effective dose in a month), as provided in Table II.2
of Appendix II, will indicate that an emergency worker receiving such a dose needs to be
registered and subjected to health screening and that the emergency worker will then need
appropriate longer term medical follow-up in order to detect radiation induced health effects
early and to treat them effectively.

37

5.64. Arrangements shall be made so that, in a nuclear or radiological emergency,
individuals with possible contamination can promptly be given appropriate
medical attention. These arrangements shall include ensuring that transport
services are provided where needed and providing instructions32 to medical
personnel on the precautions to take.
5.65. For facilities in categories I, II and III, arrangements shall be made
to manage an adequate number of any individuals with contamination or of any
individuals who have been overexposed to radiation, including arrangements for
first aid, the estimation of doses, medical transport and initial medical treatment
in predesignated medical facilities.
5.66. For areas within emergency planning zones (see para. 5.38), arrangements
shall be made for performing medical screening and triage and for assigning to a
predesignated medical facility any individual exposed at levels exceeding the
criteria in Table II.1 of Appendix II. These arrangements shall include the use
of pre-established operational criteria in accordance with the protection strategy
(see para. 4.28(4)).
5.67. Arrangements shall be made to identify individuals with possible
contamination and individuals who have possibly been sufficiently exposed for
radiation induced health effects to result, and to provide them with appropriate
medical attention, including longer term medical follow-up. These arrangements
shall include:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Guidelines for effective diagnosis and treatment;
Designation of medical personnel trained in clinical management
of radiation injuries;
Designation of institutions for evaluating radiation exposure (external and
internal), for providing specialized medical treatment and for longer term
medical actions.

These arrangements shall also include the use of pre-established operational
criteria in accordance with the protection strategy (see para. 4.28(4)) and
arrangements for medical consultation on treatment following any exposure

32

These instructions include advice that universal precautions in health care against
infection (e.g. surgical masks and gloves) generally provide medical personnel with adequate
protection when treating individuals with possible contamination.

38

that could result in severe deterministic effects (see Appendix II) with medical
personnel experienced in dealing with such injuries.33
5.68. Arrangements shall be made for the identification of individuals who
are in those population groups that are at risk of sustaining increases in the
incidence of cancers as a result of radiation exposure in a nuclear or radiological
emergency. Arrangements shall be made to take longer term medical actions
to detect radiation induced health effects among such population groups in time
to allow for their effective treatment. These arrangements shall include the use
of pre-established operational criteria in accordance with the protection strategy
(see para. 4.28(4)).
Requirement 13: Communicating with the public throughout a nuclear or
radiological emergency
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place for
communication with the public throughout a nuclear or radiological
emergency.
5.69. Arrangements shall be made for providing useful, timely, true, clear and
appropriate information to the public in a nuclear or radiological emergency, with
account taken of the possibility that the usual means of communication might
be damaged in the emergency or by its initiating event (e.g. by an earthquake
or by flooding) or overburdened by demand for its use. These arrangements shall
also include arrangements for keeping the international community informed,
as appropriate. These arrangements shall take into account the need to protect
sensitive information in circumstances where a nuclear or radiological emergency
is initiated by a nuclear security event. Communication with the public in a
nuclear or radiological emergency shall be carried out on the basis of a strategy
to be developed at the preparedness stage as part of the protection strategy.
Arrangements shall be made to adjust this strategy in the emergency response
on the basis of prevailing conditions.
5.70. Arrangements shall be made to ensure that information provided to the
public by response organizations, operating organizations, the regulatory body,
international organizations and others in a nuclear or radiological emergency

33

Such arrangements for medical consultation on treatment could include international
assistance to be provided through or to be coordinated by the IAEA and by WHO; for example,
under the Assistance Convention [13].

39

is coordinated and consistent, with due recognition of the evolutionary nature
of an emergency.
5.71. Arrangements shall be made so that in a nuclear or radiological emergency
information is provided to the public in plain and understandable language.
5.72. The government shall ensure that a system for putting radiological health
hazards in perspective in a nuclear or radiological emergency is developed and
implemented with the following aim:
—— To support informed decision making concerning protective actions and
other response actions to be taken;
—— To help in ensuring that actions taken do more good than harm;
—— To address public concerns regarding potential health effects.
In the development of such a system, due consideration shall be given to pregnant
women and children as the individuals who are most vulnerable with regard
to radiation exposure.
5.73. Arrangements shall be made to explain to the public any changes in the
protective actions and other response actions recommended in the State and any
differences from those recommended in other States (see paras 6.13–6.15).
5.74. Arrangements shall be made to identify and address, to the extent practicable,
misconceptions, rumours and incorrect and misleading information that might
be circulating widely in a nuclear or radiological emergency, in particular those
that might result in actions being taken beyond those emergency response actions
that are warranted34 (see Requirement 16).
5.75. Arrangements shall be made to respond to enquiries from the public and
from news media, both national and international, including enquiries received
from or through the IAEA. These arrangements shall recognize the evolutionary

34

Actions beyond those emergency response actions that are warranted include, but are
not limited to: actions that interfere with prompt implementation of protective actions, such
as self-evacuation both from within and from outside areas from which evacuation is ordered;
actions that unnecessarily burden the health care system; actions that shun or otherwise
discriminate against people or products from an area affected by a nuclear or radiological
emergency; elective terminations of pregnancy that are not radiologically informed; and
cancellations of commercial flights that are not radiologically informed.

40

nature of emergencies and the need to respond in a timely manner to enquiries
even when the information requested is not yet available.
Requirement 14: Taking early protective actions and other response actions
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place to take early
protective actions and other response actions effectively in a nuclear
or radiological emergency.
5.76. Within the extended planning distance (see para. 5.38), arrangements shall
be made for effective relocation that may be required following a significant
radioactive release and for the prevention of inadvertent ingestion, in accordance
with the protection strategy (see Requirement 5). These arrangements
shall include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)

Provision of instructions and advice to prevent inadvertent ingestion;
Prompt monitoring and assessment;
Use of pre-established operational criteria in accordance with the protection
strategy (see para. 4.28(4));
The means for accomplishing relocation and for assisting those persons
who have been relocated;
Provisions to extend monitoring and assessment and actions beyond the
extended planning distance if necessary.

5.77. For areas within the ingestion and commodities planning distance
(see para. 5.38), arrangements shall be made for prompt protection in relation
to, and for restriction of, non-essential local produce, forest products (e.g. wild
berries, wild mushrooms), milk from grazing animals, drinking water supplies,
animal feed and commodities with contamination or possibly with contamination
following a significant radioactive release, in accordance with the protection
strategy (see Requirement 5). These arrangements shall include:
(a)

(b)

Provision of instructions and advice:
(i) To protect the food chain, water supply and commodities
from contamination;
(ii) To prevent ingestion of food, milk and drinking water with
contamination or possibly with contamination;
(iii) To prevent use of commodities with contamination or possibly
with contamination;
Prompt monitoring, sampling and analysis.

41

(c)
(d)
(e)

Use of pre-established operational criteria in accordance with the protection
strategy (see para. 4.28(4)).
The means to enforce the restrictions.
Provisions to expand monitoring and assessment and actions beyond this
distance if necessary.

5.78. Within the emergency planning zones and the inner cordoned off area,
arrangements shall be made for monitoring the levels of contamination of people,
vehicles and goods moving out of areas with contamination, in order to control the
spread of contamination and, as applicable, for the purposes of decontamination
in accordance with the protection strategy (see Requirement 5). These
arrangements shall include the use of pre-established operational criteria
in accordance with the protection strategy (see para. 4.28(4)) and shall take
into consideration that some vehicles and items potentially with contamination,
as well as members of the public and emergency workers, might have left these
areas before the establishment of contamination control points and boundaries.
5.79. Arrangements shall be made for access control and enforcing of restrictions
for areas in which evacuations and relocations would be carried out within
emergency planning zones, the extended planning distance and the inner cordoned
off area, in accordance with the protection strategy (see Requirement 5). Returns
to these areas for short periods of time shall be permitted if justified (e.g. to feed
animals left behind) and provided that those individuals entering the area are:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Subject to controls and to dose assessment while in the area;
Instructed on how to protect themselves;
Briefed on the associated health hazards.

5.80. Arrangements shall be made to test methods of decontamination before
their general use and to assess their effectiveness in terms of dose reduction.
5.81. For a transnational emergency in category IV, arrangements shall be made for
taking early protective actions and other response actions as appropriate for areas
beyond category V, including promptly conducting monitoring and assessment
of contamination (a) of food, milk and drinking water and, as appropriate,
of commodities other than food, and (b) of vehicles and cargoes that are likely
to have contamination, with the aim of mitigating the consequences of a nuclear
or radiological emergency and reassurance of the public. These arrangements
shall include the use of pre-established operational criteria in accordance with the
protection strategy (see para. 4.28(4)).

42

5.82. Monitoring in response to a nuclear or radiological emergency shall
be carried out on the basis of a strategy to be developed at the preparedness
stage as part of the protection strategy. Arrangements shall be made to adjust the
monitoring in the emergency response on the basis of prevailing conditions.
5.83. Arrangements shall be made to carry out retrospective assessment
of exposure of members of the public in a nuclear or radiological emergency, and
to make the results of these assessments publicly available. The assessments shall
be based on the best available information, shall be put into perspective in terms
of the associated health hazards (see para. 5.72) and shall be promptly updated
in the light of information that would yield substantially more accurate results.
Requirement 15: Managing radioactive waste in an emergency
The government shall ensure that radioactive waste is managed safely and
effectively in a nuclear or radiological emergency.
5.84. The national policy and strategy for radioactive waste management [19]
shall apply for radioactive waste generated in a nuclear or radiological emergency,
with account taken of paras 5.85 to 5.88.
5.85. The protection strategy (see Requirement 5) shall take into account
radioactive waste that might arise from protective actions and other response
actions that are to be taken.
5.86. Radioactive waste arising in a nuclear or radiological emergency, including
radioactive waste arising from associated protective actions and other response
actions taken, shall be identified, characterized and categorized in due time and
shall be managed in a manner that does not compromise the protection strategy,
with account taken of prevailing conditions as these evolve.
5.87. Arrangements shall be made for radioactive waste to be managed safely
and effectively. These arrangements shall include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

A plan to characterize waste, including in situ measurements and analysis
of samples;
Criteria for categorization of waste;
Avoiding, to the extent possible, the mixing of waste of different categories;
Minimizing the amount of material unduly declared as radioactive waste;

43

(e)

(f)
(g)

A method for determining appropriate options for predisposal management
of radioactive waste (including processing, storage and transport), with
account taken of the interdependences between all steps as well as impacts
on the anticipated end points (clearance, authorized discharge, reuse,
recycling, disposal) [19, 20];
A method of identifying appropriate storage options and sites;
Consideration of non-radiological aspects of waste (e.g. chemical properties
such as toxicity, and biological properties).

5.88. Consideration shall be given to the management of human remains and
animal remains with contamination as a result of a nuclear or radiological
emergency, with due account taken of religious practices and cultural practices.
Requirement 16: Mitigating non-radiological consequences of a nuclear or
radiological emergency and of an emergency response
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place for mitigation
of non-radiological consequences of a nuclear or radiological emergency
and of an emergency response.
5.89. Non-radiological consequences of a nuclear or radiological emergency and
of an emergency response shall be taken into consideration in deciding on the
protective actions and other response actions to be taken in the context of the
protection strategy (see Requirement 5).
5.90. Arrangements shall be made for mitigating the non-radiological
consequences of an emergency and those of an emergency response and for
responding to public concern in a nuclear or radiological emergency. These
arrangements shall include arrangements for providing the people affected with:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Information on any associated health hazards and clear instructions on any
actions to be taken (see Requirement 10 and Requirement 13);
Medical and psychological counselling, as appropriate;
Adequate social support, as appropriate.

5.91. Arrangements shall be made to mitigate the impacts on international trade
of a nuclear or radiological emergency and associated protective actions and other
response actions, with account taken of the generic criteria in Appendix II. These
arrangements shall provide for issuing information to the public and interested
parties (such as importing States) on controls put in place in relation to traded

44

commodities, including food, and on vehicles and cargoes being shipped, and
on any revisions of the relevant national criteria.
5.92. Arrangements shall be put in place for any actions taken, beyond
those emergency response actions that are warranted, by members
of the public and by commercial, industrial, infrastructural or other governmental
or non-governmental bodies to be, to the extent practicable, promptly identified
and appropriately addressed. This shall include the designation of organization(s)
with the responsibility for monitoring for, identifying and addressing such actions.
Requirement 17: Requesting, providing and receiving international
assistance for emergency preparedness and response
The government shall ensure that adequate arrangements are in place
to benefit from, and to contribute to the provision of, international assistance
for preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency.
5.93. Governments and international organizations shall put in place and shall
maintain arrangements to respond in a timely manner to a request made by a
State, in accordance with established mechanisms and respective mandates, for
assistance in preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency.
5.94. Arrangements shall be put in place and maintained for requesting and
obtaining international assistance from States or international organizations
and for providing assistance to States (either directly or through the IAEA)
in preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological emergency, on the
basis of international instruments (e.g. the Assistance Convention [13]), bilateral
agreements or other mechanisms. These arrangements shall take due account
of compatibility requirements for the capabilities to be obtained from and to be
rendered to different States so as to ensure the usefulness of these capabilities.
Requirement 18: Terminating a nuclear or radiological emergency
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place and are
implemented for the termination of a nuclear or radiological emergency, with
account taken of the need for the resumption of social and economic activity.
5.95. Adjustment of protective actions and other response actions and of other
arrangements that are aimed at enabling the termination of an emergency shall
be made by a formal process that includes consultation of interested parties.

45

5.96. Arrangements for communication with the public in a nuclear
or radiological emergency (see Requirement 13) shall include arrangements for
communication on the reasons for any adjustment of protective actions and other
response actions and other arrangements aimed at enabling the termination of the
emergency. This shall include providing the public with information on the need
for any continuing protective actions following termination of the emergency and
on any necessary modifications to their personal behaviour. Arrangements shall
be made, during this period, to closely monitor public opinion and the reaction
in the news media in order to ensure that any concerns can be promptly addressed.
These arrangements shall ensure that any information provided to the public puts
health hazards in perspective (see para. 5.72).
5.97. The termination of a nuclear or radiological emergency shall be based
on a formal decision that is made public and shall include prior consultation with
interested parties, as appropriate.
5.98. Both radiological consequences and non-radiological consequences shall
be considered in deciding on the termination of an emergency as well as in the
justification and optimization of further protection strategies as necessary.
5.99. The transition to an existing exposure situation or to a planned exposure
situation shall be made in a coordinated and orderly manner, by making any
necessary transfer of responsibilities and with the increased involvement
of relevant authorities and interested parties.
5.100. The government shall ensure that, as part of its emergency preparedness,
arrangements are in place for the termination of a nuclear or radiological
emergency. The arrangements shall take into account that the termination
of an emergency might be at different times in different geographical areas. The
planning process shall include as appropriate:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)

46

The roles and functions of organizations;
Methods of transferring information;
Means for assessing radiological consequences and non-radiological
consequences;
Conditions, criteria and objectives to be met for enabling the termination
of a nuclear or radiological emergency (see Appendix II);
A review of the hazard assessment and of the emergency arrangements;
Establishment of national guidelines for the termination of an emergency;

(g)
(h)

Arrangements for continued communication with the public, and for
monitoring of public opinion and the reaction in the news media;
Arrangements for consultation of interested parties.

5.101. Once the emergency is terminated, all workers undertaking relevant
work shall be subject to the relevant requirements for occupational exposure
in planned exposure situations [8], and individual monitoring, environmental
monitoring and health surveillance shall be conducted subject to the requirements
for planned exposure situations or existing exposure situations, as appropriate [8].
Requirement 19: Analysing the nuclear or radiological emergency and the
emergency response
The government shall ensure that the nuclear or radiological emergency and
the emergency response are analysed in order to identify actions to be taken
to avoid other emergencies and to improve emergency arrangements.
5.102. Arrangements shall be made to document, protect and preserve, in an
emergency response, to the extent practicable, data and information important
for an analysis of the nuclear or radiological emergency and the emergency
response. Arrangements shall be made to undertake a timely and comprehensive
analysis of the nuclear or radiological emergency and the emergency response
with the involvement of interested parties. These arrangements shall give due
consideration to the need for making contributions to relevant internationally
coordinated analyses and for sharing the findings of the analysis with relevant
response organizations. The analysis shall give due consideration to:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)

The reconstruction of the circumstances of the emergency;
The root causes of the emergency;
Regulatory controls including regulations and regulatory oversight;
General implications for safety, including the possible involvement of other
sources or devices (including those in other States);
General implications for nuclear security, as appropriate;
Necessary improvements to emergency arrangements;
Necessary improvements to regulatory control.

5.103. Arrangements shall be made to enable comprehensive interviews on the
circumstances of the nuclear or radiological emergency to be conducted with
those involved.

47

5.104. Arrangements shall be made to acquire (e.g. from the IAEA,
from another State or from the manufacturer of relevant equipment) the
expertise necessary to conduct an analysis of the circumstances of the nuclear
or radiological emergency.
5.105. Arrangements shall be made to take actions promptly on the basis of an
analysis to avoid other emergencies, including provision of information to other
operating organizations, as relevant, or to other States, directly or through
the IAEA.

6. REQUIREMENTS FOR INFRASTRUCTURE
GENERAL
6.1. This section establishes the requirements for infrastructural elements that
are essential to providing the capability for fulfilling the requirements established
in Section 5 in accordance with the hazard assessment and the protection strategy.
Requirement 20: Authorities for emergency preparedness and response
The government shall ensure that authorities for preparedness and response
for a nuclear or radiological emergency are clearly established.
6.2. The authorities for developing, maintaining and regulating arrangements,
both on the site and off the site, for preparedness and response for a nuclear
or radiological emergency shall be established by means of acts, legal codes
or statutes.
6.3. All of the functions specified in Section 5 shall be assigned to
the appropriate operating organizations and to local, regional and national
response organizations. The involvement of all these organizations
in the performance of these functions, or in support of their performance,
shall be documented.35 The documentation shall specify their roles, functions,
authorities and responsibilities in emergency preparedness and response and shall
35

Typically, the involvement of operating organizations and local, regional and national
response organizations is documented as part of the appropriate facility, local, regional and
national emergency plans.

48

assent to the authorities, roles and responsibilities of other response organizations.
Conflicting or potentially conflicting and overlapping roles and responsibilities
shall be identified and conflicts shall be resolved at the preparedness stage
through the national coordinating mechanism (see para. 4.10).
6.4. The authority and responsibility for making decisions on response actions
to be taken on the site and off the site (see para. 5.7) and the authority and
responsibility for communication with the public shall be clearly assigned for
each phase of the response.
6.5. The emergency arrangements shall include clear assignment
of
responsibilities and authorities, and shall provide for coordination and for
communication in all phases of the response. These arrangements shall include:
—— Ensuring that for each response organization a position in the response
hierarchy has the authority and responsibility to direct and to coordinate its
response actions;
—— Clearly assigning the authority and responsibility for the direction and
coordination of the entire response (see para. 5.7) and for the prevention
and resolution of conflicts between response organizations;
—— Assigning to an on-site position the authority and responsibility for
notifying the appropriate response organization(s) of an emergency and for
taking immediate on-site actions;
—— Assigning to an on-site position the responsibility for directing the entire
on-site emergency response (see paras 5.2 and 5.7).
These arrangements shall be such as to ensure that those personnel with authority
and responsibility to perform critical response functions36 in an emergency
response are not assigned any other responsibilities in an emergency that would
interfere with the prompt performance of the specified functions.
6.6. The arrangements for delegation and/or transfer of authority shall
be specified in the relevant emergency plans, together with arrangements for
notifying all appropriate parties of the transfer.

36

Critical response functions are functions that must be performed promptly and
correctly in order to classify, declare and notify an emergency, to activate an emergency
response, to manage the response, to take mitigatory actions, to protect emergency workers and
to take urgent protective actions on and off the site.

49

Requirement 21: Organization and staffing for emergency preparedness and
response
The government shall ensure that overall organization for preparedness and
response for a nuclear or radiological emergency is clearly specified and
staffed with sufficient personnel who are qualified and are assessed for their
fitness for their intended duties.
6.7. The organizational relationships for preparedness and response for a nuclear
or radiological emergency and interfaces between all the response organizations
shall be established.
6.8. The positions responsible within each operating organization and response
organization for performance of the response functions specified in Section 5 shall
be assigned in the emergency plans and procedures. The positions responsible
in each operating organization, in each response organization and in the regulatory
body for the performance of activities at the preparedness stage, in accordance
with these requirements, shall be assigned as part of the routine organizational
structures and shall be specified, as appropriate, in the emergency plans
and procedures.
6.9. Personnel who are assigned to positions in all operating organizations
and response organizations to perform the functions necessary to meet the
requirements established in Section 5 shall be qualified and shall be assessed for
their initial fitness and continuing fitness for their intended duties.
6.10. Appropriate numbers of suitably qualified personnel shall be available
at all times (including during 24 hour a day operations) so that appropriate
positions can be promptly staffed as necessary following the declaration and
notification of a nuclear or radiological emergency. Appropriate numbers
of suitably qualified personnel shall be available for the long term to staff the
various positions necessary to take mitigatory actions, protective actions and
other response actions.
6.11. For a site where multiple facilities in category I or II are collocated,
an appropriate number of suitably qualified personnel shall be available
to manage an emergency response at all facilities if each of the facilities is under
emergency conditions simultaneously (see para. 5.4).

50

Requirement 22: Coordination of emergency preparedness and response
The government shall ensure that arrangements are in place for the
coordination of preparedness and response for a nuclear or radiological
emergency between the operating organization and authorities at the local,
regional and national levels, and, where appropriate, at the international
level.
6.12. Arrangements shall be developed, as appropriate, for the coordination
of emergency preparedness and response and of protocols for operational
interfaces between operating organizations and authorities at the local, regional
and national levels, including those organizations and authorities responsible
for the response to conventional emergencies and to nuclear security events
(see paras 4.3, 4.10, 6.3 and Requirement 6). The arrangements shall be clearly
documented and the documentation shall be made available to all relevant parties.
Arrangements shall be put in place to ensure effective working relationships
among these organizations, both at the preparedness stage and in an emergency.
6.13. When several different organizations of the State or of other States are
expected to have or to develop tools, procedures or criteria for use in the response
to an emergency, arrangements for coordination shall be put in place to improve
the consistency of the assessments of the situation, including assessments
of contamination, doses and radiation induced health effects and any other
relevant assessments made in a nuclear or radiological emergency, so as not
to give rise to confusion.
6.14. Arrangements shall be made to coordinate with other States in the event of a
transnational emergency any protective actions and other response actions that
are recommended to their citizens and to their embassies in order either to ensure
that they are consistent with those recommended in other States, or to provide
an opportunity for them to explain to the public the basis for any differences
(see para. 5.73).
6.15. Arrangements shall be made to ensure that States with areas in category V are
provided with appropriate information for developing their own preparedness
to respond to a transboundary emergency and that appropriate coordination
across national borders is in place. These arrangements shall include:
(a)

Agreements and protocols to provide information necessary to develop
a coordinated means for notification, classification schemes and criteria for
taking and for adjusting protective actions and other response actions;
51

(b)
(c)

Arrangements for communication with the public;
Arrangements for the exchange of information between decision making
authorities.

Requirement 23: Plans and procedures for emergency response
The government shall ensure that plans and procedures necessary for
effective response to a nuclear or radiological emergency are established.
6.16. Plans, procedures and other arrangements for effective emergency response,
including coordinating mechanisms, letters of agreement or legal instruments,
shall be made for coordinating a national emergency response. The arrangements
for a coordinated national emergency response:
—— Shall specify the organization responsible for the development and
maintenance of the arrangements;
—— Shall describe the responsibilities of operating organizations and other
response organizations;
—— Shall describe the coordination effected between these arrangements and
the arrangements for response to a conventional emergency and to a nuclear
security event.
Consideration shall be given in these plans, procedures and other arrangements
to the need to protect information that might be confidential.
6.17. Each response organization shall prepare an emergency plan
or plans for coordinating and performing their assigned functions as specified
in Section 5 and in accordance with the hazard assessment and the protection
strategy. An emergency plan shall be developed at the national level that
integrates all relevant plans for emergency response in a coordinated manner and
consistently with an all-hazards approach. Emergency plans shall specify how
responsibilities for managing operations in an emergency response are to be
discharged on the site, off the site and across national borders, as appropriate.
The emergency plans shall be coordinated with other plans and procedures that
may be implemented in a nuclear or radiological emergency, to ensure that the
simultaneous implementation of the plans would not reduce their effectiveness
or cause conflicts. Such other plans and procedures include:
(a)
(b)

52

Emergency plans for facilities in category I and for areas in category V;
Security plans and contingency plans [9, 10];

(c)
(d)
(e)

Procedures for the investigation of a nuclear security event, including
identification, collection, packaging and transport of evidence contaminated
with radionuclides, nuclear forensics and related activities [11];
Evacuation plans;
Plans for firefighting.

6.18. The appropriate responsible authorities shall ensure that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

(e)

A ‘concept of operations’37 for emergency response is developed at the
beginning of the preparedness stage.
Emergency plans and procedures are prepared and, as appropriate,
approved for any facility or activity, area or location that could give rise
to an emergency warranting protective actions and other response actions.
Response organizations and operating organizations, as appropriate,
are involved in the preparation of emergency plans and procedures,
as appropriate.
Account is taken in the content, features and extent of emergency plans
of the results of any hazard assessment and any lessons from operating
experience and from past emergencies, including conventional emergencies
(see paras 4.18–4.26).
Emergency plans and procedures are periodically reviewed and updated
(see paras 6.36 and 6.38).

6.19. The operating organization of a facility or for an activity in category I, II, III
or IV shall prepare an emergency plan. This emergency plan shall be coordinated
with those of all other bodies that have responsibilities in a nuclear or radiological
emergency, including public authorities, and shall be submitted to the regulatory
body for approval.
6.20. The operating organization and response organizations shall develop the
necessary procedures and analytical tools to be able to perform the functions
specified in Section 5 for the goals of emergency response to be achieved and for
the emergency response to be effective.

37

A concept of operations is a brief description of an ideal response to a postulated nuclear
or radiological emergency, used to ensure that all those personnel and organizations involved in
the development of a capability for emergency response share a common understanding.

53

6.21. Procedures and analytical tools shall be tested under simulated emergency
conditions and shall be validated prior to initial use. Any arrangements for the
use of analytical tools early in an emergency response for supporting decision
making on protective actions and other response actions shall be made in due
recognition of the limitations38 of such analytical tools and in a way that would
not reduce the effectiveness of response actions. These limitations shall be made
clear to, and shall be recognized by, those responsible for decision making.
Requirement 24: Logistical support and facilities for emergency response
The government shall ensure that adequate logistical support and facilities
are provided to enable emergency response functions to be performed
effectively in a nuclear or radiological emergency.
6.22. Adequate tools, instruments, supplies, equipment, communication systems,
facilities and documentation (such as documentation of procedures, checklists,
manuals, telephone numbers and email addresses) shall be provided for performing
the functions specified in Section 5. These items and facilities shall be selected
or designed to be operational under the conditions (such as radiological conditions,
working conditions and environmental conditions) that could be encountered
in the emergency response, and to be compatible with other procedures and
equipment for the response (e.g. compatible with the communication frequencies
used by other response organizations), as appropriate. These support items shall
be located or provided in a manner that allows their effective use under the
emergency conditions postulated.
6.23. For facilities in categories I and II, as contingency measures, alternative
supplies for taking on-site mitigatory actions, such as an alternative supply
of water and an alternative electrical power supply, including any necessary
equipment, shall be ensured. This equipment shall be located and maintained
so that it can be functional and readily accessible when needed (see also Safety
of Nuclear Power Plants: Design (SSR-2/1) [18]).

38

An example of such limitations is that the timing and magnitude of radioactive
releases in an emergency at a nuclear power plant that would warrant taking precautionary
urgent protective actions and urgent protective actions off the site before, or shortly after, a
radioactive release may not be predictable. In addition, the radioactive release could occur over
several days, resulting in complex deposition patterns off the site.

54

6.24. Emergency response facilities or locations to support an emergency response
under the full range of postulated hazardous conditions shall be designated and
shall be assigned the following functions, as appropriate:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
(i)
(j)

Receiving notifications and initiating the response;
Coordination and direction of on-site response actions;
Providing technical and operational support to those personnel performing
tasks at a facility and those personnel responding off the site;
Direction of off-site response actions and coordination with on-site
response actions;
Coordination of national response actions;
Coordination of communication with the public;
Coordination of monitoring, sampling and analysis;
Managing those people who have been evacuated (including reception,
registration, monitoring and decontamination, as well as provision for
meeting their personal needs, including for housing, food and sanitation);
Managing the storage of necessary resources;
Providing individuals who have undergone exposure or contamination with
appropriate medical attention including medical treatment.

6.25. For facilities in category I, emergency response facilities39 separate from
the control room and supplementary control room shall be provided so that:
(a)
(b)
(c)

Technical support can be provided to the operating personnel in the control
room in an emergency (from a technical support centre).
Operational control by personnel performing tasks at or near the facility
can be maintained (from an operational support centre).
The on-site emergency response is managed (from an emergency centre).

These emergency response facilities shall operate as an integrated system
in support of the emergency response, without conflicting with one
another’s functions, and shall provide reasonable assurance of being operable and
habitable under a range of postulated hazardous conditions, including conditions
not considered in the design.

39

Emergency response facilities may be collocated (i.e. these functions may be
performed from a single emergency response facility or location) provided that it is ensured
that they do not conflict with each other in performing their specified functions and provided
that they are separated from the control rooms.

55

6.26. Arrangements shall be made for performing appropriate and reliable
analyses of samples40 and measurements of internal contamination for the
purposes of emergency response and of health screening, as appropriate.
Such arrangements shall include the designation of laboratories that would
be operational under postulated emergency conditions.
6.27. Arrangements shall be made to obtain appropriate support from
organizations responsible for providing support in conventional emergencies for
logistics and communication, for social welfare and in other areas.
Requirement 25: Training, drills and exercises for emergency preparedness
and response
The government shall ensure that personnel relevant for emergency response
shall take part in regular training, drills and exercises to ensure that they
are able to perform their assigned response functions effectively in a nuclear
or radiological emergency.
6.28. The operating organization and response organizations shall identify the
knowledge, skills and abilities necessary to perform the functions specified
in Section 5. The operating organization and response organizations shall make
arrangements for the selection of personnel and for training to ensure that the
personnel selected have the requisite knowledge, skills and abilities to perform
their assigned response functions. The arrangements shall include arrangements
for continuing refresher training on an appropriate schedule and arrangements
for ensuring that personnel assigned to positions with responsibilities in an
emergency response undergo the specified training.
6.29. For facilities in category I, II or III, all personnel and all other persons
on the site shall be instructed in the arrangements for them to be notified of an
emergency and of their actions if notified of an emergency.
6.30. Exercise programmes shall be developed and implemented to ensure that
all specified functions required to be performed for emergency response, all
organizational interfaces for facilities in category I, II or III, and the national
level programmes for category IV or V are tested at suitable intervals. These
programmes shall include the participation in some exercises of, as appropriate
40

Arrangements for analyses could include, for example, arrangements for performing
analyses of environmental and biological samples as well as analyses of other samples taken
from the facility for the purpose of assessing its operational status.

56

and feasible, all the organizations concerned, people who are potentially affected,
and representatives of news media. The exercises shall be systematically
evaluated (see para. 4.10(h)) and some exercises shall be evaluated by the
regulatory body. Programmes shall be subject to review and revision in the light
of experience gained (see paras 6.36 and 6.38).
6.31. The personnel responsible for critical response functions shall participate
in drills and exercises on a regular basis so as to ensure their ability to take their
actions effectively.
6.32. Officials off the site who are responsible for making decisions on protective
actions and other response actions shall be trained and shall regularly participate
in exercises. Officials off the site who are responsible for communication with
the public in a nuclear or radiological emergency shall regularly participate
in exercises.
6.33. The conduct of exercises shall be evaluated against pre-established
objectives of emergency response to demonstrate that identification, notification,
activation and response actions can be performed effectively to achieve the goals
of emergency response (see para. 3.2).
Requirement 26: Quality management programme for emergency
preparedness and response
The government shall ensure that a programme is established within
an integrated management system to ensure the availability and reliability
of all supplies, equipment, communication systems and facilities, plans,
procedures and other arrangements necessary for effective response in a
nuclear or radiological emergency.
6.34. The operating organization, as part of its management system (see Ref. [14]),
and response organizations, as part of their emergency management system, shall
establish a programme to ensure the availability and reliability of all supplies,
equipment, communication systems and facilities, plans, procedures and other
arrangements necessary to perform functions in a nuclear or radiological
emergency as specified in Section 5 (see para. 6.22). The programme shall
include arrangements for inventories, resupply, tests and calibrations, to ensure
that these are continuously available and are functional for use in a nuclear
or radiological emergency.

57

6.35. The programme shall also include periodic and independent appraisals
against functions as specified in Section 5, including participation in
international appraisals41.
6.36. Arrangements shall be made to maintain, review and update emergency
plans, procedures and other arrangements and to incorporate lessons from
research, operating experience (such as in the response to emergencies) and
emergency exercises.
6.37. The operating organization and response organizations shall establish and
maintain adequate records in relation to both emergency arrangements and the
response to a nuclear or radiological emergency, to include dose assessments,
results of monitoring and inventory of radioactive waste managed, in order
to allow for their review and evaluation. These records shall also provide for the
identification of those persons requiring longer term medical actions, as necessary,
and shall provide for the long term management of radioactive waste.
6.38. The operating organization and response organizations shall make
arrangements to review and evaluate responses in actual events and in exercises,
in order to record the areas in which improvements are necessary and to ensure
that the necessary improvements are made (see Requirement 19).
6.39. Relevant international organizations shall review and update their
applicable standards and guidelines and their relevant arrangements in emergency
preparedness and response on the basis of research and lessons from the response
to actual emergencies and in emergency exercises.

41

Examples of international appraisals include those organized by the IAEA, such as
Emergency Preparedness Review (EPREV) missions.

58

Appendix I
GUIDANCE VALUES FOR RESTRICTING EXPOSURE
OF EMERGENCY WORKERS
I.1. This Appendix provides guidance values as a basis for operational guidance
for restricting the exposure of emergency workers.
I.2. Table I.1 provides guidance values for restricting the exposure of emergency
workers in an emergency response in terms of personal dose equivalent Hp(10)
from external exposure to strongly penetrating radiation. The values for Hp(10)
in Table I.1 assume that every effort has been made for protection against external
exposure to weakly penetrating radiation and against exposure due to intakes
or skin contamination (see para. 5.53).
I.3. The total effective dose and the relative biological effectiveness (RBE)
weighted absorbed dose to a tissue or organ via all exposure pathways (i.e. both
dose from external exposure and committed dose from intakes) need to be
estimated as early as possible in a nuclear or radiological emergency. Table I.1 also
provides guidance on the effective dose and the RBE weighted absorbed dose to a
tissue or organ for consideration in restricting further exposure in the response
to a nuclear or radiological emergency once these doses have been estimated.
I.4. Severe deterministic effects to a fetus could possibly occur following
an equivalent dose to the fetus of greater than 100 mSv. Consequently, in the
response to a nuclear or radiological emergency, female workers who are aware
that they are pregnant or who might be pregnant need to be (1) informed of this
risk and (2) excluded from taking actions that might result in an equivalent
dose to the embryo and fetus exceeding 50 mSv for the full period of in utero
development of the embryo and fetus.

59

TABLE I.1. GUIDANCE VALUES FOR RESTRICTING EXPOSURE
OF EMERGENCY WORKERS
Tasks

Lifesaving actions

Guidance valuea
Hp(10)b

Ec

ADTd

<500 mSv

<500 mSv

< 21 ADT, Table II.1e

This value may be exceeded — with due
consideration of the generic criteria in Table II.1
of Appendix II — under circumstances in which
the expected benefits to others clearly outweigh
the emergency worker’s own health risks, and the
emergency worker volunteers to take the action
and understands and accepts these health risks

Actions to prevent severe deterministic
effects and actions to prevent the
development of catastrophic conditions
that could significantly affect people
and the environment

<500 mSv

<500 mSv

< 21 ADT, Table II.1

Actions to avert a large collective dose

<100 mSv

E < 100 mSv

< 101 ADT, Table II.1

a

b
c
d
e

60

These values are set to be two to ten times lower than the generic criteria in Table II.1 of
Appendix II and they apply for:
(a) The dose from external exposure to strongly penetrating radiation for Hp(10). Doses from
external exposure to weakly penetrating radiation and from intake or skin contamination
need to be prevented by all possible means. If this is not feasible, the effective dose and
the RBE weighted absorbed dose to a tissue or organ have to be limited to minimize
the health risk to the individual in line with the risk associated with the guidance values
given here.
(b) The total effective dose E and the RBE weighted absorbed dose to a tissue or organ ADT
via all exposure pathways (i.e. both dose from external exposure and committed dose
from intakes) which are to be estimated as early as possible in order to enable any further
exposure to be restricted as appropriate.
Personal dose equivalent Hp(d) where d = 10 mm.
Effective dose.
RBE weighted absorbed dose to a tissue or organ.
Values of RBE weighted absorbed dose to a tissue or organ given in Table II.1 of Appendix II.

Appendix II
GENERIC CRITERIA FOR USE IN EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS
AND RESPONSE
II.1. This Appendix provides generic criteria:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

For doses for which protective actions and other response actions are expected
to be undertaken under any circumstances in a nuclear or radiological
emergency to avoid or to minimize severe deterministic effects;
For doses for which protective actions and other response actions are
expected to be taken, if they can be taken safely, in a nuclear or radiological
emergency to reasonably reduce the risk of stochastic effects;
For doses for which restriction of international trade is warranted
in a nuclear or radiological emergency, with due consideration of
non-radiological consequences;
For doses for use as a target dose for the transition to an existing
exposure situation.

Appendix II includes examples of associated protective actions and other response
actions. These generic criteria and associated protective actions and other
response actions shall be taken into account in the development of the protection
strategy, including national generic criteria in accordance with Requirement 5.
If protective actions in the context of the protection strategy are to be taken when
doses are below the generic criteria given in this Appendix, careful consideration
is necessary to ensure that such actions are justified (i.e. that they do more good
than harm) and that they are optimized in accordance with Requirement 5.

61

GENERIC CRITERIA FOR DOSES RECEIVED WITHIN A SHORT
PERIOD OF TIME FOR WHICH RESPONSE ACTIONS ARE EXPECTED
TO BE TAKEN UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES IN AN EMERGENCY
RESPONSE
II.2. Table II.1 provides generic criteria for doses received within a short period
of time for which protective actions and other response actions are expected to be
taken under any circumstances in a nuclear or radiological emergency to avoid
or to minimize severe deterministic effects.
TABLE II.1. GENERIC CRITERIA FOR DOSES RECEIVED WITHIN
A SHORT PERIOD OF TIME FOR WHICH PROTECTIVE ACTIONS
AND OTHER RESPONSE ACTIONS ARE EXPECTED TO BE TAKEN
UNDER ANY CIRCUMSTANCES IN AN EMERGENCY TO AVOID OR TO
MINIMIZE SEVERE DETERMINISTIC EFFECTS
Acute external exposure (<10 h)
AD red marrowa

1 Gy

If the dose is projected:

AD fetus

0.1b Gy

AD tissuec

25 Gy at 0.5 cm

AD skind

10 Gy to 100 cm2

— Take precautionary urgent protective
actions immediately (even under difficult
conditions) to keep doses below the
generic criteria;
— Provide public information and warnings;
— Carry out urgent decontamination.

Acute internal exposure due to an acute intake
(Δ = 30 de)
AD(Δ)red marrow 0.2 Gy for radionuclides with
atomic number Z ≥ 90f
2 Gy for radionuclides with
atomic number Z ≤ 89f
AD(Δ)thyroid

2 Gy

AD(Δ)lungh

30 Gy

AD(Δ)colon

20 Gy

AD(Δ′)fetusi

0.1b Gy

a

62

If the dose has been received:
— Perform immediate medical examination,
medical consultation and indicated
medical treatment;
— Carry out contamination control;
— Carry out immediate decorporationg
(if applicable);
— Conduct registration for longer term
medical follow-up;
— Provide comprehensive psychological
counselling.

ADred marrow represents the average RBE weighted absorbed dose to internal tissues or organs
(e.g. red marrow, lung, small intestine, gonads, thyroid) and to the lens of the eye from
exposure in a uniform field of strongly penetrating radiation.

b

c
d
e

f

g

h
i

At 0.1 Gy there would be only a very small probability of severe deterministic effects to
the fetus and only during certain periods post-conception (e.g. between 8 and 15 weeks
of in utero development), and only if the dose is received at high dose rates. During other
periods post-conception and for lower dose rates, the fetus is less sensitive. There is a high
probability of severe deterministic effects at 1 Gy. Therefore, 1 Gy is used as the generic
criterion for doses to the fetus received within a short period of time: (i) in the hazard
assessment (see para. 4.23), to identify facilities and activities, on-site areas, off-site areas and
locations for which a nuclear or radiological emergency could warrant precautionary urgent
protective actions to avoid or to minimize severe deterministic effects; (ii) for identifying
situations in which exposure is dangerous to health; and (iii) for making arrangements (see
para. 5.38) for applying decisions on urgent protective actions and other response actions to
be taken off the site to avoid or to minimize the occurrence of severe deterministic effects
(e.g. establishing a precautionary action zone).
Dose delivered to 100 cm2 at a depth of 0.5 cm under the body surface in tissue due to close
contact with a radioactive source (e.g. source carried in the hand or pocket).
The dose is to the 100 cm2 dermis (skin structures at a depth of 40 mg/cm2 (or 0.4 mm)
below the surface).
AD(Δ) is the RBE weighted absorbed dose delivered over a period of time Δ by the intake
(I05) that will result in a severe deterministic effect in 5% of exposed individuals. This dose
is calculated as described in appendix I of Ref. [21].
Different generic criteria are used to take account of the significant difference in RBE
weighted absorbed dose from exposure at the intake threshold values specific for these two
groups of radionuclides.
Decorporation is the action of the biological processes, facilitated by chemical or biological
agents, by means of which incorporated radionuclides are removed from the human body.
The generic criterion for decorporation is based on the projected dose without decorporation.
For the purposes of these generic criteria, ‘lung’ means the alveolar–interstitial region of the
respiratory tract.
For this particular case, ‘Δ’ refers to the period of in utero development of the embryo and
fetus.

63

GENERIC CRITERIA FOR PROTECTIVE ACTIONS AND OTHER
RESPONSE ACTIONS TO REDUCE THE RISK OF STOCHASTIC EFFECTS
II.3. Table II.2 provides generic criteria for taking protective actions and other
response actions in a nuclear or radiological emergency to reduce the risk
of stochastic effects.

TABLE II.2. GENERIC CRITERIA FOR PROTECTIVE ACTIONS AND
OTHER RESPONSE ACTIONS IN AN EMERGENCY TO REDUCE THE
RISK OF STOCHASTIC EFFECTS (cont.)
Generic criteria

Examples of protective actions and
other response actionsa

Projected dose that exceeds the following generic criteria:
Take urgent protective actions and other response actions
Hthyroid

50 mSvb in the first 7 days

Iodine thyroid blockingc

Ed

100 mSv in the first 7 days

Hfetusf

100 mSv in the first 7 days

Shelteringe; evacuation; prevention of inadvertent
ingestion; restrictions on food, milk and drinking
waterg and restrictions on the food chain and water
supply; restrictions on commodities other than
food; contamination control; decontamination;
registration; reassurance of the public

Projected dose that exceeds the following generic criteria:
Take early protective actions and other response actions
Ed

100 mSv in the first year

Hfetusf

100 mSv for the full period of
in utero development

64

Temporary relocation; prevention of inadvertent
ingestion; restrictions on food, milk and drinking
waterg and restrictions on the food chain and water
supply; restrictions on commodities other than
food; contamination control; decontamination;
registration; reassurance of the public

TABLE II.2. GENERIC CRITERIA FOR PROTECTIVE ACTIONS AND
OTHER RESPONSE ACTIONS IN AN EMERGENCY TO REDUCE THE
RISK OF STOCHASTIC EFFECTS (cont.)
Generic criteria

Examples of protective actions and
other response actionsa

Dose that has been received and that exceeds the following generic criteria:
Take longer term medical actions to detect and to effectively treat radiation induced health
effects
Ed

100 mSv in a month

Health screening based on equivalent doses to
specific radiosensitive organs (as a basis for longer
term medical follow-up)h, registration, counselling

Hfetusf

100 mSv for the full period of
in utero development

Counselling to allow informed decisions to be
made in individual circumstances

a
b
c

d
e

f

g

h

These examples are neither exhaustive nor grouped in a mutually exclusive way.
The equivalent dose to the thyroid (Hthyroid) only due to exposure to radioiodine.
This generic criterion applies only for administration of iodine thyroid blocking.
For the thyroid, iodine thyroid blocking is an urgent protective action that is prescribed:
(a) if exposure due to radioactive iodine is involved, (b) before or shortly after a release of
radioactive iodine, and (c) within only a short period before or after the intake of radioactive
iodine.
Effective dose.
As a less disruptive protective action, sheltering may be ordered at lower doses as long as
justified and optimized in accordance with Requirement 5 with due consideration of the
reference level in para. 4.28(2).
Hfetus is the equivalent dose to the fetus, derived as the sum of the dose from external
exposure and the maximum committed equivalent dose to any organ of the embryo or fetus
from intake to the embryo or fetus for different chemical compounds and different times
relative to conception.
Restrictions on food, milk and drinking water using these generic criteria are to be
applied before sampling and analysis of food, milk and drinking water are carried out.
Such restrictions apply as long as replacements of food, milk and drinking water or other
alternatives are available to ensure they would not result in severe malnutrition, dehydration
or other severe health impacts.
When results of the health screening indicate that the criteria in Table II.1 are exceeded, then
appropriate medical attention on the basis of Appendix II (see Table II.1) is necessary.

65

GENERIC CRITERIA FOR FOOD, MILK AND DRINKING WATER
AND OTHER COMMODITIES TO REDUCE THE RISK OF
STOCHASTIC EFFECTS
II.4. Table II.3 provides generic criteria for taking protective actions and other
response actions to reduce the risk of stochastic effects from the ingestion
of food, milk and drinking water and from the use of other commodities in a
nuclear or radiological emergency.
II.5. A value of 1/10 of the generic criteria given in Table II.2 for early protective
actions and other response actions is established as generic criteria for restrictions
on food, milk and drinking water and on other commodities to ensure that the
dose via all exposure pathways, including ingestion, will not exceed the generic
criteria given in Table II.2 for early protective actions and other response actions.
II.6. If restrictions on food, milk or drinking water would result in severe
malnutrition or dehydration because replacements are not available, food, milk
or drinking water with concentration levels of radionuclides that are projected
to result in doses above the generic criteria given in Table II.3 may be consumed
until replacements are available provided that this would not result in doses from
all exposure pathways above the generic criteria given in Table II.2; otherwise,
the people affected may be relocated.

66

TABLE II.3. GENERIC CRITERIA FOR FOOD, MILK AND DRINKING
WATER AND OTHER COMMODITIES TO REDUCE THE RISK
OF STOCHASTIC EFFECTS
Generic criteria

Examples of protective actions and
other response actions

Projected dose from ingestion of food, milk and drinking water and from the use of other
commodities that exceeds the following generic criteria:
Take protective actions and other response actions
Ea

10 mSv in the first year

Hfetusd

10 mSv for the full period of
in utero development

a
b

c

d

Restrict consumption, distribution and sale of
non-essentialb food, milk and drinking waterc and
restrict the use and distribution of other commodities.
Replace essential food, milk and drinking water as
soon as possible or relocate the people affected if
replacements are not available. Estimate the doses
of those who might have consumed food, milk
and drinking water or used other commodities to
determine whether this may have resulted in doses
warranting medical attention in accordance with
Table II.2.

Effective dose.
Restricting essential food, milk or drinking water could result in dehydration, severe
malnutrition or other severe health impacts; therefore, essential food, milk and drinking
water is to be restricted only if alternatives are available.
These criteria for taking actions on food, milk and drinking water are applied once the
sampling and analysis of food, milk and drinking water is carried out. This would also
provide a basis for discontinuing restrictions imposed on food, milk and drinking water as a
precaution on the basis of the generic criteria in Table II.2.
Hfetus is the equivalent dose to the fetus derived as the sum the dose from external exposure
and the maximum committed equivalent dose to any organ from intake to the embryo or
fetus for different chemical compounds and different times relative to conception.

67

GENERIC CRITERIA FOR VEHICLES, EQUIPMENT AND
OTHER ITEMS TO REDUCE THE RISK OF STOCHASTIC EFFECTS
II.7. Table II.4 provides generic criteria for taking protective actions and
other response actions to reduce the risk of stochastic effects arising from the
use of vehicles, equipment and other items from an area affected by a nuclear
or radiological emergency.
II.8. A value of 1/10 of the generic criteria given in Table II.2 for early protective
actions and other response actions is established as generic criteria for vehicles,
equipment and other items from an affected area, to ensure that the dose via all
exposure pathways, including the use of such vehicles, equipment and other
items, would not exceed the generic criteria given in Table II.2 for early actions
for a member of the public.
II.9. Restricting the use of vehicles, equipment and other items from an affected
area could interfere with taking urgent protective actions and other response
actions or with providing services essential to public health or well-being
(e.g. restricting the use of vehicles for transferring individuals requiring critical
medical treatment or preventing a ship or an aircraft that has left an affected
area from reaching its final destination). Such vehicles, equipment and other
items whose use would give rise to a projected dose to their users above the
generic criteria given in Table II.4 may be used until replacements are available,
provided that:
(a)

(b)

68

Their use will not result in doses from all exposure pathways that
exceed the generic criteria given in Table II.2 for members of the public
or the guidance values given in Appendix I for restricting the exposure
of emergency workers, or the restriction set in para. 5.57 for exposures
of helpers in an emergency.
Actions are taken to manage and control the exposure of the user as an
emergency worker, a helper in an emergency or a member of the public,
as appropriate.

TABLE II.4. GENERIC CRITERIA FOR VEHICLES, EQUIPMENT AND
OTHER ITEMS TO REDUCE THE RISK OF STOCHASTIC EFFECTS
Generic criteria

Examples of protective actions and
other response actions

Projected dose from the use of vehicles, equipment or other items from an affected area that
exceed the following generic criteria:
Take protective actions and other response actions
Ea

10 mSv in the first year

Hfetusc

10 mSv for the full period of
in utero development

a
b

c

Restrict non-essentialb use. Use essential vehicles,
equipment and other items from an affected area
until replacements are available provided that:
(a) their use will not result in doses from all
exposure pathways exceeding the generic criteria
given in Table II.2 for a member of the public
or the guidance values given in Appendix I for
restricting the exposure of emergency workers, or
the restriction set in para. 5.57 for exposures of
helpers in an emergency; and (b) actions are taken
to control the dose to the user as an emergency
worker, helper in an emergency or a member of
the public, as appropriate. Estimate doses to those
emergency workers, helpers in an emergency
and members of the public who may have used
a vehicle, equipment or other item from an
affected area to determine whether this could have
resulted in a dose warranting medical attention in
accordance with Table II.2.

Effective dose.
Restricting the use of vehicles, equipment and other items from an affected area could
interfere with taking urgent protective actions and other response actions or with providing
services essential to public health or well-being (e.g. restricting the use of vehicles for
transferring individuals requiring critical medical treatment).
Hfetus is the equivalent dose to the fetus derived as the sum of the dose from external
exposure and the maximum committed equivalent dose to any organ from intake to
the embryo or fetus for different chemical compounds and different times relative to
conception.

69

GENERIC CRITERIA FOR FOOD AND OTHER COMMODITIES TRADED
INTERNATIONALLY
II.10. Table II.5 provides generic criteria aimed at the effective implementation
of response actions to reduce the non-radiological consequences of a nuclear
or radiological emergency by providing a basis for the continuation or the
resumption of international trade.
II.11. Values that exceed the generic criteria in Table II.5 may be acceptable
under emergency (temporary) conditions.
II.12 The generic criteria for food traded internationally derive from the level
used by the Joint FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission [22]. These
generic criteria, and generic criteria for other commodities traded internationally
that could contain radionuclides following a nuclear or radiological emergency,
are established at 1/100 of the generic criteria given in Table II.2 for early
protective actions and other response actions to ensure that doses to the public
would be a small fraction of those for which actions are warranted to reduce the
risk of stochastic effects.
II.13. For food traded internationally that could contain radionuclides following
a nuclear or radiological emergency, the operational criteria (i.e. guideline levels)
as published by the Joint FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission [22] may
ultimately be used (see para. 5.23 of GSR Part 3 [8]).
II.14. If restricting trade in food and other commodities could result in severe
health impacts or other detrimental effects in another State, then the food and
other commodities that would give rise to a projected dose that exceeds the
generic criteria in Table II.5 may be traded — if the trade is justified — until
replacements are available, provided that:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)

70

The trade is approved with the receiving State.
The trade will not result in doses that exceed the generic criteria for the
public given in Table II.2 and Table II.3.
Actions are taken to manage and control exposures during shipping.
Actions are taken to control the consumption of food and use of other
commodities and to reduce the exposure of members of the public.

TABLE II.5.
GENERIC CRITERIA FOR FOOD
COMMODITIES TRADED INTERNATIONALLY
Generic criteria

AND

OTHER

Examples of other response actions

Projected dose from food and other commodities that exceed the generic criteria:
Take response actions to restrict international trade.
Ea

1 mSv per year

Hfetusc

1 mSv for the full period of
in utero development

a
b

c

Restrict non-essentialb international trade. Trade
essential food and other commodities until
replacements are available if: (a) trade is approved
with the receiving State; (b) trade will not result in
doses to the public that exceed the generic criteria
given in Table II.2 for all exposure pathways and in
Table II.3 for the respective pathways; (c) actions
are taken to manage and control the dose during
shipping; and (d) actions are taken to control the
consumption and use of food and other commodities
and to reduce the exposure of members of the public.

Effective dose.
Restricting the trade of essential commodities and food could result in severe health
impacts or other detrimental conditions in another State.
Hfetus is the equivalent dose to the fetus derived as the sum of the dose from external
exposure and the maximum committed equivalent dose to any organ from intake to
the embryo or fetus for different chemical compounds and different times relative to
conception.

71

GENERIC CRITERIA FOR ENABLING A TRANSITION TO AN EXISTING
EXPOSURE SITUATION
II.15. Generic criteria shall be established in terms of the projected dose for the
implementation of protective actions and other actions aimed at enabling the
termination of a nuclear or radiological emergency and the subsequent transition
to an existing exposure situation with due consideration of, and verification of the
fulfilment of, the conditions set out in para. II.16. These criteria are established
as 1/5 of the generic criteria for the early protective actions and other response
actions given in Table II.242 and are:
(a)
(b)

An effective dose of 20 mSv per year;
An equivalent dose to a fetus of 20 mSv for the full period of in
utero development.

II.16. The decision to terminate the nuclear or radiological emergency and the
subsequent transition to an existing exposure situation is to be taken after:
(a)

(b)
(c)

Justified actions (see para. 4.29) have been taken to reach the generic
criteria43 for enabling the transition to an existing exposure situation and
it has been confirmed that any further actions to reach these criteria would
do more harm than good;
Confirmation that the source of exposure is fully characterized for all
members of the public living as normal in the area;
The situation with regard to exposure has been understood and has
remained stable;

42

Criteria established as 1/5 of the generic criteria for the early protective actions
and other response actions given in Table II.2 are considered to be generically justified. This
is of the order of the dose for which the government is required to establish an action plan
to reduce activity concentrations for sources of exposure (e.g. 222Rn) for existing exposure
situations [8]. Being at the lower bound of the reference level for emergency exposure situations
(see para. 4.28 (2)), this level is also consistent with the reference levels established in GSR
Part 3 [8] for both emergency exposure situations and existing exposure situations.
43
Actions taken (see para. 4.29) to reach the generic criteria in para. II.15 need to be
justified and optimized in accordance with Requirement 5. However, it may not be feasible
to reach these criteria for enabling the transition to an existing exposure situation. If it is not
feasible or justified to reach these generic criteria, the transition may still be possible as long
as the generic criteria for early protective actions and other response actions given in Table II.2
are not exceeded.

72

(d)
(e)

Any restrictions on normal living conditions are limited and provisions are
in place to confirm compliance with such restrictions;
Confirmation that interested parties, including the public, have been
consulted and are being kept informed about the basis for the adjustment
of emergency response actions and for the transition, with the associated
health hazards put into perspective (see para. 5.72).

73

REFERENCES
[1] EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY, FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC
ENERGY
AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL
LABOUR
ORGANIZATION,
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY
AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION,
Fundamental Safety Principles, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SF-1, IAEA,
Vienna (2006).
[2] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Objective and Essential Elements
of a State’s Nuclear Security Regime: Nuclear Security Fundamentals, IAEA Nuclear
Security Series No. 20, IAEA, Vienna (2013).
[3] INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION, The
2007 Recommendations of the International Commission on Radiological Protection,
Publication 103, Elsevier, Oxford and New York (2007).
[4] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR
OFFICE, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION, Criteria for Use in Preparedness and Response for a Nuclear
or Radiological Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSG-2, IAEA,
Vienna (2011).
[5] FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS,
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR
OFFICE, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS OFFICE
FOR THE CO-ORDINATION OF HUMANITARIAN AFFAIRS, WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION, Arrangements for Preparedness for a Nuclear or Radiological
Emergency, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-G-2.1, IAEA, Vienna (2007).
[6] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Planning and Preparing for
Emergency Response to Transport Accidents Involving Radioactive Material, IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. TS-G-1.2 (ST-3), IAEA, Vienna (2002).
[7] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Governmental, Legal and
Regulatory Framework for Safety, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 1
(Rev. 1), IAEA, Vienna (in preparation).
[8] EUROPEAN COMMISSION, FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION
OF THE UNITED NATIONS, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY
AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS
ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME, WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Radiation
Protection and Safety of Radiation Sources: International Basic Safety Standards, IAEA
Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 3, IAEA, Vienna (2014).
[9] INTERNATIONAL
ATOMIC
ENERGY
AGENCY,
Nuclear
Security
Recommendations on Physical Protection of Nuclear Material and Nuclear Facilities
(INFCIRC/225/Revision 5), IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 13, IAEA, Vienna (2011).

75

[10] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Nuclear Security Recommendations
on Radioactive Material and Associated Facilities, IAEA Nuclear Security Series
No. 14, IAEA, Vienna (2011).
[11] EUROPEAN POLICE OFFICE, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL
CRIMINAL POLICE ORGANIZATION–INTERPOL, UNITED NATIONS
INTERREGIONAL CRIME AND JUSTICE RESEARCH INSTITUTE,
UNITED NATIONS OFFICE ON DRUGS AND CRIME, WORLD CUSTOMS
ORGANIZATION, Nuclear Security Recommendations on Nuclear and Other
Radioactive Material out of Regulatory Control, IAEA Nuclear Security Series No. 15,
IAEA, Vienna (2011).
[12] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, IAEA Safety Glossary:
Terminology Used in Nuclear Safety and Radiation Protection, 2007 Edition, IAEA,
Vienna (2007).
[13] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Convention on Early Notification
of a Nuclear Accident and Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident
or Radiological Emergency, Legal Series No. 14, IAEA, Vienna (1987).
[14] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, The Management System for
Facilities and Activities, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GS-R-3, IAEA, Vienna
(2006). (Revision of this publication in preparation.)
[15] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY
AGENCY, INES: The International Nuclear and Radiological Event Scale
User’s Manual, 2008 Edition, IAEA, Vienna (2013).
[16] WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, International Health Regulations (2005),
Second Edition, World Health Organization, Geneva (2008).
[17] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Safety of Nuclear Power Plants:
Commissioning and Operation, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-2/2 (Rev. 1),
IAEA, Vienna (in preparation).
[18] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Safety of Nuclear Power
Plants: Design, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-2/1 (Rev. 1), IAEA, Vienna
(in preparation).
[19] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Predisposal Management
of Radioactive Waste, IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 5, IAEA,
Vienna (2009).
[20] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Disposal of Radioactive Waste,
IAEA Safety Standards Series No. SSR-5, IAEA, Vienna (2011).
[21] INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dangerous Quantities
of Radioactive Material (D-values), Emergency Preparedness and Response Series,
EPR-D-VALUES 2006, IAEA, Vienna (2006).
[22] CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION, Codex General Standard for Contaminants
and Toxins in Food and Feed, Schedule 1 — Radionuclides, CODEX STAN 193-1995,
Codex Alimentarius Commission, Rome (2006).

76

Annex
APPLICABILITY OF PARAGRAPHS IN THIS PUBLICATION BY
EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS CATEGORY
A–1. Table A–1 presents the applicability of paragraphs in this publication
by emergency preparedness category.

TABLE A–1. APPLICABILITY OF PARAGRAPHS IN THIS PUBLICATION
BY EMERGENCY PREPAREDNESS CATEGORY
Category
I

Paragraphs applicable in this publication
1.1–1.17
2.1–2.8

II

III

IV

V

3.1–3.2
4.1–4.10, 4.18–4.20,
4.22–4.25, 4.27–4.31
5.1, 5.6–5.8, 5.11,
5.18–5.20, 5.22,
5.31, 5.36–5.37,
5.48–5.61, 5.64,
5.67–5.75, 5.78–5.80,
5.82–5.105
6.1–6.10, 6.12–6.14,
6.16–6.18, 6.20–6.22,
6.24, 6.26–6.28,
6.30–6.39

4.11–4.17,
4.26
5.3, 5.5,
5.14–5.17,
5.23–5.24,
5.26
6.19

5.2, 5.25, 5.27,
5.32–5.34,
5.41–5.43, 5.65
6.29

4.21
5.13, 5.28–5.30,
5.35, 5.44,
5.62–5.63, 5.81

5.4, 5.9, 5.12,
5.21, 5.38–5.40,
5.45–5.46, 5.66,
5.76–5.77

6.25

6.11, 6.15, 6.23

5.10, 5.47

5.9, 5.12, 5.21, 5.39–5.40, 5.45–5.46, 5.66,
5.76–5.77
6.15

77

DEFINITIONS
The following definitions apply for the purposes of this safety standard.
The symbol ‘’ denotes an information note; this note is not part
of the definition.
arrangements. See ‘(emergency) arrangements’.
authorization. The granting by a regulatory body or other governmental body
of written permission for a person or organization (the operator) to conduct
specified activities.
control. The function or power or (usually as controls) means of directing,
regulating or restraining.
 It should be noted that the usual meaning of the English word control
in safety related contexts is somewhat ‘stronger’ (more active) than that
of its usual translations and other similar words in some other languages.
For example, ‘control’ typically implies not only checking or monitoring
something but also ensuring that corrective or enforcement measures
are taken if the results of the checking or monitoring indicate such
a need. This is in contrast, for example, to the more limited usage of the
equivalent word in French and Spanish.
regulatory control. Any form of control or regulation applied to facilities
and activities by a regulatory body for reasons relating to nuclear safety
and radiation protection or to nuclear security.
 In the Nuclear Security Series1 , the phrase ‘out of regulatory control’
is used to describe a situation in which nuclear material or other
radioactive material is present without an appropriate authorization,
either because controls have failed for some reason, or because they
never existed.
1

EUROPEAN POLICE OFFICE, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY,
INTERNATIONAL CIVIL AVIATION ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL CRIMINAL
POLICE ORGANIZATION–INTERPOL, UNITED NATIONS INTERREGIONAL CRIME
AND JUSTICE RESEARCH INSTITUTE, UNITED NATIONS OFFICE ON DRUGS AND
CRIME, WORLD CUSTOMS ORGANIZATION, Nuclear Security Recommendations on
Nuclear and Other Radioactive Material out of Regulatory Control, IAEA Nuclear Security
Series No. 15, IAEA, Vienna (2011).

79

dangerous source. See ‘source’.
deterministic effect. A radiation induced health effect for which generally
a threshold level of dose exists above which the severity of the effect
is greater for a higher dose.
 Such an effect is described as a severe deterministic effect if it is fatal
or life threatening or results in a permanent injury that reduces quality
of life.
 The level of the threshold dose is characteristic of the particular health
effect but may also depend, to a limited extent, on the exposed individual.
Examples of deterministic effects include erythema, damage to the
haemopoietic system and acute radiation syndrome (radiation sickness).
Deterministic effects are also referred to as ‘harmful tissue reactions’.
early protective actions. See ‘protective actions’.
emergency. A non-routine situation or event that necessitates prompt action,
primarily to mitigate a hazard or adverse consequences for human life,
health, property or the environment.
 This includes nuclear and radiological emergencies and conventional
emergencies such as fires, releases of hazardous chemicals, storms
or earthquakes.
 This includes situations for which prompt action is warranted to mitigate
the effects of a perceived hazard.
nuclear or radiological emergency. An emergency in which there is,
or is perceived to be, a hazard due to:
(a) The energy resulting from a nuclear chain reaction or from the
decay of the products of a chain reaction;
(b) Radiation exposure.
 When used in IAEA publications, the term radiation normally refers
only to ionizing radiation. The IAEA has no statutory responsibilities
in relation to non-ionizing radiation.

80

emergency action level (EAL). A specific, predetermined criterion for observable
conditions used to detect, recognize and determine the emergency class.
(emergency) arrangements. The integrated set of infrastructural elements,
put in place at the preparedness stage, that are necessary to provide the
capability for performing a specified function or task required in response
to a nuclear or radiological emergency.
 These elements may include: authorities and responsibilities,
organization, coordination, personnel, plans, procedures, facilities,
equipment or training.
emergency class. A set of conditions that warrant a similar immediate
emergency response.
 This is the term used for communicating to the response organizations
and to the public the level of response needed. The events that belong to a
given emergency class are defined by criteria specific to the installation,
source or activities, which, if exceeded, indicate classification at the
prescribed level. For each emergency class, the initial actions of the
response organizations are predefined.
emergency classification. The process whereby an authorized official classifies
an emergency in order to declare the applicable emergency class.
 Upon declaration of the emergency class, the response organizations
initiate the predefined emergency response actions for that
emergency class.
emergency exposure situation. A situation of exposure that arises as a result
of an accident, a malicious act or other unexpected event, and requires
prompt action in order to avoid or to reduce adverse consequences.
 Exposure in an emergency can be reduced only by protective actions
and other response actions.
emergency plan. A description of the objectives, policy and concept of operations
for the response to an emergency and of the structure, authorities and
responsibilities for a systematic, coordinated and effective response. The
emergency plan serves as the basis for the development of other plans,
procedures and checklists.
81

 A concept of operations is a brief description of an ideal response
to a postulated nuclear or radiological emergency, used to ensure that
all those personnel and organizations involved in the development of a
capability for emergency response share a common understanding.
emergency planning distance. The extended planning distance (EPD) and the
ingestion and commodities planning distance (ICPD).
emergency planning zone. The precautionary action zone (PAZ) and the urgent
protective action planning zone (UPZ).
emergency preparedness. The capability to take actions that will effectively
mitigate the consequences of an emergency for human life, health, property
and the environment.
emergency procedures. A set of instructions describing in detail the actions
to be taken by emergency workers in an emergency.
emergency response. The performance of actions to mitigate the consequences
of an emergency for human life, health, property and the environment.
 The emergency response also provides a basis for the resumption
of normal social and economic activity.
emergency (response) action. An action to be taken in response to a nuclear
or radiological emergency to mitigate the consequences of an emergency
for human life, health, property and the environment.
 Emergency response actions comprise protective actions and other
response actions.
other response action. An emergency response action other than
a protective action.
 The most common other response actions are: medical examination,
consultation and treatment; registration and longer term medical
follow-up; providing psychological counselling; and public information
and other actions for mitigating non-radiological consequences and for
public reassurance.

82

emergency response facility or location. A facility or location necessary for
supporting an emergency response, for which specific functions are to be
assigned at the preparedness stage, and which need to be usable under
emergency conditions.
 There are two different types of emergency response facility or location:
those established in advance (e.g. a technical support centre for
a nuclear power plant) and those designated at the time of an emergency
(e.g. a medical screening and triage area).
 For both types, advance preparations are necessary to ensure their
operability under emergency conditions. Depending on the emergency
preparedness category and on the nature of an emergency, an emergency
response facility may be designated as an emergency response location.
emergency services. The local off-site response organizations that are generally
available and that perform emergency response functions. These may
include police, firefighters and rescue brigades, ambulance services and
control teams for hazardous materials.
emergency worker. A person having specified duties as a worker in response
to an emergency.
 Emergency workers may include workers employed, both directly and
indirectly, by registrants and licensees, as well as personnel of response
organizations, such as police officers, firefighters, medical personnel,
and drivers and crews of vehicles used for evacuation.
 Emergency workers may or may not be designated as such in advance
to an emergency. Emergency workers not designated as such in advance
of an emergency are not necessarily workers prior to the emergency.
existing exposure situation. An existing exposure situation is a situation
of exposure that already exists when a decision on the need for control
needs to be taken.

83

 Existing exposure situations include exposure to natural background
radiation that is amenable to control; exposure due to residual
radioactive material that derives from past practices that were never
subject to regulatory control; and exposure due to residual radioactive
material deriving from a nuclear or radiological emergency after
an emergency has been declared to be ended.
extended planning distance (EPD). Area around a facility for which emergency
arrangements are made to conduct monitoring following the declaration of a
general emergency and to identify areas warranting emergency response
actions to be taken off the site within a period following a significant
radioactive release that would allow the risk of stochastic effects among
members of the public to be effectively reduced.
 The area within the extended planning distance serves for planning
purposes and may not be the actual area in which monitoring
is to be conducted to identify areas where early protective actions
such as relocation are necessary. While efforts need to be made at the
preparedness stage to prepare for taking effective early protective actions
within this area, the actual area will be determined by the prevailing
conditions in an emergency.
 As a precaution, some urgent protective actions may be warranted
within the EPD to reduce the risk of stochastic effects among members
of the public.
facilities and activities. A general term encompassing nuclear facilities, uses
of all sources of ionizing radiation, all radioactive waste management
activities, transport of radioactive material and any other practice
or circumstances in which people may be subject to exposure to radiation
from naturally occurring or artificial sources.
 Facilities includes: nuclear facilities; irradiation installations; some
mining and raw material processing facilities such as uranium mines;
radioactive waste management facilities; and any other places where
radioactive material is produced, processed, used, handled, stored
or disposed of — or where radiation generators are installed — on such
a scale that consideration of protection and safety is required.

84

 Activities includes: the production, use, import and export of radiation
sources for industrial, research and medical purposes; the transport
of radioactive material; the decommissioning of facilities; radioactive
waste management activities such as the discharge of effluents; and
some aspects of the remediation of sites affected by residues from
past activities.
 This term is intended to provide an alternative to the terminology
of sources and practices (or interventions) to refer to general categories
of situations. For example, a practice may involve many different
facilities and/or activities, whereas the general definition (1) of source
is too broad in some cases: a facility or activity might constitute
a source, or might involve the use of many sources, depending upon the
interpretation used.
 The term ‘facilities and activities’ is very general, and includes those for
which little or no regulatory control may be necessary or achievable: the
more specific terms authorized facility and authorized activity should
be used to distinguish those facilities and activities for which any form
of authorization has been given.
 In the Fundamental Safety Principles (Safety Fundamentals2), the term
‘facilities and activities — existing and new — utilized for peaceful
purposes’ is abbreviated for convenience to facilities and activities
as a general term encompassing any human activity that may cause
people to be exposed to radiation risks arising from naturally occurring
or artificial sources (see para. 1.9 of the Safety Fundamentals2).
first responders. The first members of an emergency service to respond at the
site of an emergency.
generic criteria. Levels for the projected dose, or the dose that has been received,
at which protective actions and other response actions are to be taken.
2

EUROPEAN ATOMIC ENERGY COMMUNITY, FOOD AND AGRICULTURE
ORGANIZATION OF THE UNITED NATIONS, INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY
AGENCY, INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANIZATION, INTERNATIONAL
MARITIME ORGANIZATION, OECD NUCLEAR ENERGY AGENCY, PAN AMERICAN
HEALTH ORGANIZATION, UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME,
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION, Fundamental Safety Principles, IAEA Safety Standards
Series No. SF-1, IAEA, Vienna (2006).

85

 The term generic criteria as defined here relates to emergency
preparedness and response only.
graded approach. (1) For a system of control, such as a regulatory system
or a safety system, a process or method in which the stringency
of the control measures and conditions to be applied is commensurate,
to the extent practicable, with the likelihood and possible consequences
of, and the level of risk associated with, a loss of control.
(2) An application of safety requirements that is commensurate with the
characteristics of the facilities and activities or the source and with the
magnitude and likelihood of the exposures.
hazard assessment. Assessment of hazards associated with facilities, activities
or sources within or beyond the borders of a State in order to identify:
(a) Those events and the associated areas for which protective actions and
other response actions may be required within the State;
(b) Actions that would be effective in mitigating the consequences
of such events.
helper in an emergency. Member of the public who willingly and voluntarily
helps in the response to a nuclear or radiological emergency.
 Helpers in an emergency are protected and are aware that they
could be exposed to radiation while helping in response to a nuclear
or radiological emergency.
ingestion and commodities planning distance (ICPD). Area around a facility
for which emergency arrangements are made to take effective emergency
response actions following the declaration of a general emergency
in order to reduce the risk of stochastic effects among members of the
public and to mitigate non-radiological consequences as a result of the
distribution, sale and consumption of food, milk and drinking water and
the use of commodities other than food that may have contamination from
a significant radioactive release.
 The area within the ingestion and commodities planning distance
serves for planning purposes to prepare for emergency response actions
to monitor and control commodities, including food, either for domestic

86

use or for international trade. The actual area will be determined on the
basis of the prevailing conditions in an emergency.
 As a precaution, some urgent protective actions may be warranted
within the ingestion and commodities planning distance to prevent
the ingestion of food, milk or drinking water and to prevent the use
of commodities that may have contamination following a significant
radioactive release.
inner cordoned off area. An area established by first responders in an emergency
around a potential radiation hazard, within which protective actions and
other emergency response actions are taken to protect first responders and
members of the public from possible exposure and contamination.
interested party. A person, company, etc. with a concern or interest in the
activities and performance of an organization, business, system, etc.
 The term interested party is used in a broad sense to mean a person
or group having an interest in the performance of an organization. Those
who can influence events may effectively become interested parties —
whether their ‘interest’ is regarded as ‘genuine’ or not — in the sense
that their views need to be considered. Interested parties have typically
included the following: customers, owners, operators, employees,
suppliers, partners, trade unions; the regulated industry or professionals;
scientific bodies; governmental agencies or regulatory bodies (local,
regional and national) whose responsibilities may cover nuclear energy;
the media; members of the public (individuals, community groups and
interest groups); and other States, especially neighbouring States that
have entered into agreements providing for an exchange of information
concerning possible transboundary impacts, or States involved in the
export or import of certain technologies or materials.
justification. The process of determining for an emergency exposure situation
or an existing exposure situation whether a proposed protective action
or remedial action is likely, overall, to be beneficial; i.e. whether the
expected benefits to individuals and to society (including the reduction
in radiation detriment) from introducing or continuing the protective action
or remedial action outweigh the cost of such action and any harm or damage
caused by the action.

87

management system. A set of interrelated or interacting elements (system)
for establishing policies and objectives and enabling the objectives to be
achieved in an efficient and effective manner.
 The component parts of the management system include the
organizational structure, resources and organizational processes.
Management is defined (in ISO 9000) as coordinated activities to direct
and control an organization.
 The management system integrates all elements of an organization into
one coherent system to enable all of the organization’s objectives to be
achieved. These elements include the organizational structure, resources
and processes. Personnel, equipment and organizational culture as well
as the documented policies and processes are parts of the management
system. The organization’s processes have to address the totality of the
requirements on the organization as established in, for example, IAEA
safety standards and other international codes and standards.
non-radiological consequences. Adverse psychological, societal or economic
consequences of a nuclear or radiological emergency or of an emergency
response affecting human life, health, property or the environment.
 The term non-radiological consequences as defined here relates
to emergency preparedness and response only.
notification. (1) A report submitted promptly to a national or international
authority providing details of an emergency or a possible emergency;
for example, as required by the Convention on Early Notification of a
Nuclear Accident 3.
(2) A set of actions taken upon detection of emergency conditions with
the purpose of alerting all organizations with responsibility for emergency
response in the event of such conditions.
notification point. A designated organization with which arrangements have
been made to receive notification (meaning (2)) and to initiate promptly the
predetermined actions to activate a part of the emergency response.
3

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Convention on Early Notification
of a Nuclear Accident and Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or
Radiological Emergency, Legal Series No. 14, IAEA, Vienna (1987).

88

notifying State. The State that is responsible for notifying (see notification
meaning (1)) potentially affected States and the IAEA of an event of actual,
potential or perceived radiological significance for other States.
 This includes:
(1) The State Party that has jurisdiction or control over the facility
or activity (including space objects) in accordance with Article 1 of
the Convention on Early Notification of a Nuclear Accident 3;
(2) The State that initially detects or discovers evidence
of a transnational emergency, for example by: detecting significant
increases in atmospheric radiation levels of unknown origin;
detecting contamination in transboundary shipments; discovering
a dangerous source that may have originated in another State;
or diagnosing clinical symptoms that may have resulted from
exposure outside the State.
nuclear or radiological emergency. See ‘emergency’.
nuclear security. The prevention and detection of, and response to, criminal
or intentional unauthorized acts involving nuclear material, other
radioactive material, associated facilities or associated activities.
nuclear security event. An event that has potential or actual implications for
nuclear security that must be addressed.4
off-site (area). See ‘site (area)’.
on-site (area). See ‘site (area)’.
operating personnel. Individual workers engaged in the operation of an
authorized facility or the conduct of an authorized activity.
operating organization. Any organization or person applying for authorization
or authorized to operate an authorized facility or to conduct an authorized
activity and responsible for its safety.

4

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Objective and Essential Elements
of a State’s Nuclear Security Regime: Nuclear Security Fundamentals, IAEA Nuclear Security
Series No. 20, IAEA, Vienna (2013).

89

 This includes, inter alia, private individuals, governmental bodies,
consignors or carriers, licensees, hospitals and self-employed persons.
 ‘Operator’ includes either those who are directly in control of a facility
or an activity during use of a source (such as radiographers or carriers)
or, in the case of a source not under control (such as a lost or illicitly
removed source or a re-entering satellite), those who were responsible
for the source before control over it was lost.
operational criteria. Values of measurable quantities or observable conditions
(i.e. observables) to be used in the response to a nuclear or radiological
emergency in order to determine the need for appropriate protective actions
and other response actions.
 Operational criteria used in emergency preparedness and response
include operational intervention levels (OILs), emergency action levels
(EALs), specific observable conditions (i.e. observables) and other
indicators of conditions on the site.
 The operational criteria are sometimes referred to as triggers.
operational intervention level (OIL). A set level of a measurable quantity that
corresponds to a generic criterion.
 Operational intervention levels are typically expressed in terms of dose
rates or of activity of radioactive material released, time integrated air
activity concentrations, ground or surface concentrations, or activity
concentrations of radionuclides in environmental, food or water samples.
 An operational intervention level is used immediately and directly
(without further assessment) to determine the appropriate protective
actions on the basis of an environmental measurement.
optimization (of protection and safety). The process of determining what level
of protection and safety would result in the magnitude of individual doses,
the number of individuals (workers and members of the public) subject
to exposure and the likelihood of exposure being as low as reasonably
achievable, economic and social factors being taken into account
(ALARA).

90

planned exposure situation. A planned exposure situation is a situation
of exposure that arises from the planned operation of a source or from
a planned activity that results in an exposure from a source.
 Since provision for protection and safety can be made before embarking
on the activity concerned, associated exposures and their probabilities
of occurrence can be restricted from the outset. The primary means
of controlling exposure in planned exposure situations is by good
design of installations, equipment and operating procedures. In planned
exposure situations, a certain level of exposure is expected to occur.
precautionary action zone (PAZ). An area around a facility for which
emergency arrangements have been made to take urgent protective actions
in the event of a nuclear or radiological emergency to avoid or to minimize
severe deterministic effects off the site. Protective actions within this area
are to be taken before or shortly after a release of radioactive material or an
exposure, on the basis of prevailing conditions at the facility.
preparedness stage. The stage or phase at which arrangements for
an effective emergency response are established prior to a nuclear
or radiological emergency.
projected dose. The dose that would be expected to be received if planned
protective actions were not taken.
protective action. An action for the purposes of avoiding or reducing doses
that might otherwise be received in an emergency exposure situation or an
existing exposure situation.
early protective action. A protective action in the event of a nuclear
or radiological emergency that can be implemented within days to weeks
and still be effective.
 The most common early protective actions are relocation and longer
term restriction of the consumption of food potentially affected
by contamination.

91

mitigatory action. Immediate action by the operator or other party:
(a) To reduce the potential for conditions to develop that would result
in exposure or a release of radioactive material requiring emergency
response actions on the site or off the site; or
(b) To mitigate source conditions that may result in exposure
or a release of radioactive material requiring emergency response
actions on the site or off the site.
urgent protective action. A protective action in the event of a nuclear
or radiological emergency which must be taken promptly (usually
within hours to a day) in order to be effective, and the effectiveness
of which will be markedly reduced if it is delayed.
 Urgent protective actions include iodine thyroid blocking, evacuation,
short term sheltering, actions to reduce inadvertent ingestion,
decontamination of individuals and prevention of ingestion of food,
milk or drinking water possibly with contamination.
 A precautionary urgent protective action is an urgent protective
action taken before or shortly after a release of radioactive material,
or an exposure, on the basis of the prevailing conditions to avoid or to
minimize severe deterministic effects.
radiological assessor. A person or team who in the event of a nuclear
or radiological emergency assists the operator or off-site response
organizations by performing radiological surveys, performing dose
assessments, controlling contamination, ensuring the radiation protection
of emergency workers and formulating recommendations on protective
actions and other response actions.
reference level. For an emergency exposure situation or an existing exposure
situation, the level of dose, risk or activity concentration above which
it is not appropriate to plan to allow exposures to occur and below which
optimization of protection and safety would continue to be implemented.
 The value chosen for a reference level will depend upon the prevailing
circumstances for the exposure under consideration.

92

regulatory body. An authority or a system of authorities designated
by the government of a State as having legal authority for conducting the
regulatory process, including issuing authorizations, and thereby regulating
nuclear, radiation, radioactive waste and transport safety.
 The national competent authority for the regulation of radioactive
material transport safety is included in this description, as is the
regulatory body for protection and safety.
representative person. An individual receiving a dose that is representative
of the doses to the more highly exposed individuals in the population.
 The International Commission on Radiological Protection’s Publication
1015 indicates that the dose to the representative person “is the
equivalent of, and replaces, the mean dose in the ‘critical group’ ”, and
provides guidance on assessing doses to the representative person. The
concept of critical group remains valid.
residual dose. The dose expected to be incurred after protective actions have been
terminated (or after a decision has been taken not to take protective actions).
 Residual dose applies for an existing exposure situation or an emergency
exposure situation.
response organization. An organization designated or recognized by a State
as being responsible for managing or implementing any aspect of an
emergency response.
 This also includes those organizations or services necessary to support
the management and/or conduct of an emergency response, such
as meteorological services.
site area. A geographical area that contains an authorized facility, authorized
activity or source, and within which the management of the authorized
facility or authorized activity or first responders may directly initiate
emergency response actions.
5

INTERNATIONAL COMMISSION ON RADIOLOGICAL PROTECTION,
Assessing Dose of the Representative Person for the Purpose of the Radiation Protection of
the Public and the Optimisation of Radiological Protection: Broadening the Process, ICRP
Publication 101, Elsevier, Oxford (2006).

93

 This is typically the area within the security perimeter fence or other
designated property marker. It may also be the controlled area around
a radiography source or an inner cordoned off area established by first
responders around a suspected hazard.
on-site (area). (Area) within the site area.
off-site (area). (Area) outside the site area.
source. (1) Anything that may cause radiation exposure — such as by emitting
ionizing radiation or by releasing radioactive substances or radioactive
material — and can be treated as a single entity for purposes of protection
and safety.
 For example, materials emitting radon are sources in the environment;
a sterilization gamma irradiation unit is a source for the practice
of irradiation preservation of food and sterilization of other products;
an X ray unit may be a source for the practice of radiodiagnosis; a nuclear
power plant is part of the practice of generating electricity by nuclear
fission, and may be regarded as a source (e.g. with respect to discharges
to the environment) or as a collection of sources (e.g. for occupational
radiation protection purposes). A complex or multiple installation
situated at one location or site may, as appropriate, be considered
a single source for the purposes of application of safety standards.
(2) Radioactive material used as a source of radiation.
 Such as those sources used for medical applications or in industrial
instruments. These are, of course, sources as defined in (1), but this
usage in (2) is less general.
dangerous source. A source that could, if not under control, give
rise to exposure sufficient to cause severe deterministic effects.
This categorization is used for determining the need for emergency
arrangements and is not to be confused with categorizations of sources
for other purposes.

94

 The term dangerous source relates to dangerous quantities of radioactive
material (D-values) as recommended in the IAEA publication
on Dangerous Quantities of Radioactive Material.6
radioactive source. A source containing radioactive material that is used
as a source of radiation.
special facility. A facility for which predetermined facility specific actions need
to be taken if urgent protective actions are ordered in its locality in the
event of a nuclear or radiological emergency.
 Examples include chemical plants that cannot be evacuated until
certain actions have been taken to prevent fire or explosions and
telecommunications centres that must be staffed in order to maintain
telephone services.
special population group. Members of the public for whom special arrangements
are necessary in order for effective protective actions to be taken in the
event of a nuclear or radiological emergency. Examples include persons
with disabilities, hospital patients and prisoners.
stochastic effect. A radiation induced health effect, the probability of occurrence
of which is greater for a higher radiation dose and the severity of which
(if it occurs) is independent of dose.
 Stochastic effects may be somatic effects or hereditary effects, and
generally occur without a threshold level of dose. Examples include
solid cancers and leukaemia.
transient population group. Those members of the public who are residing for
a short period of time (days to weeks) in a location (such as a camping
ground) that can be identified in advance. This does not include members
of the public who may be travelling through an area.
transnational emergency. A nuclear or radiological emergency of actual,
potential or perceived radiological significance for more than one State.

6

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY, Dangerous Quantities
of Radioactive Material (D-values), Emergency Preparedness and Response Series,
EPR-D-VALUES 2006, IAEA, Vienna (2006).

95

 This may include:
(1) A significant transboundary release of radioactive material
(however, a transnational emergency does not necessarily imply
a significant transboundary release of radioactive material);
(2) A general emergency at a facility or other event that could result
in a significant transboundary release (atmospheric or aquatic)
of radioactive material;
(3) Discovery of the loss or illicit removal of a dangerous source
that has been transported across, or is suspected of having been
transported across, a national border;
(4) An emergency resulting in significant disruption to international
trade or travel;
(5) An emergency warranting the taking of protective actions for
foreign nationals or embassies in the State in which it occurs;
(6) An emergency resulting in or potentially resulting in severe
deterministic effects and involving a fault and/or problem (such
as in equipment or software) that could have serious implications
for safety internationally;
(7) An emergency resulting in or potentially resulting in great concern
among the population of more than one State owing to the actual
or perceived radiological hazard.
significant transboundary release: A release of radioactive material
to the environment that may result in doses or levels of contamination
beyond national borders from the release which exceed generic criteria
for protective actions and other response actions, including food
restrictions and restrictions on trade.
urgent protective action. See ‘protective action’.
urgent protective action planning zone (UPZ). An area around a facility for
which arrangements have been made to take urgent protective actions in the
event of a nuclear or radiological emergency to avert doses off the site
in accordance with international safety standards. Protective actions within
this area are to be taken on the basis of environmental monitoring — or,
as appropriate, prevailing conditions at the facility.

96

warning point. A designated organization to act as a point of contact that
is staffed or able to be alerted at all times for promptly responding to,
or initiating a response to, an incoming notification (meaning (1)) warning
message, request for assistance or request for verification of a message,
as appropriate, from the IAEA.
worker. Any person who works, whether full time, part time or temporarily,
for an employer and who has recognized rights and duties in relation
to occupational radiation protection.
 A self-employed person is regarded as having the duties of both
an employer and a worker.

97

CONTRIBUTORS TO DRAFTING AND REVIEW
Aaltonen, H.

Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority, Finland

Baciu, A.

Consultant, Romania

Baciu, F.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Benderitter, M.

Institute for Radiological Protection and Nuclear
Safety, France

Blackburn, C.M.

Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations

Boal, T.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Brendebach, B.

Installation and Reactor Safety Company, Germany

Brock, G.

International Civil Aviation Organization

Buglova, E.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Bulski, W.

Maria Sklodowska-Curie Memorial Cancer Center and
Institute of Oncology, Poland

Byron, D.H.

Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations

Carr, Z.

World Health Organization

Charlebois, P.

International Maritime Organization

Chen, P.

World Meteorological Organization

Colgan, T.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Crick, M.

United Nations Scientific Committee on
the Effects of Atomic Radiation

de Cort, M.

European Commission

Delves, D.

International Atomic Energy Agency

dos Santos, R.

National Nuclear Energy Commission, Brazil

Evans, R.L.

International Atomic Energy Agency

99

Gaunt, M.

International Labour Organization,
International Organization of Employers

Gioia, A.

International Atomic Energy Agency

González, A.J.

Nuclear Regulatory Authority, Argentina

Gusev, I.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Heinrich, A.

United States Department of Energy,
United States of America

Hlavacka, R.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Homma, T.

Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Japan

Hubbard, L.

Swedish Radiation Protection Authority, Sweden

Jiménez, P.

Pan American Health Organization

Jones, C.G.

Permanent Mission of the United States of America
to the International Atomic Energy Agency,
United States of America

Jourdain, J.-R.

Institute for Radiological Protection and Nuclear
Safety, France

Kenigsberg, J.

National Commission on Radiation Protection, Belarus

King, A.

INTERPOL

Kumano, Y.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Kutkov, V.

Kurchatov Institute National Research Centre,
Russian Federation

Lafortune, J.-F.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Lazo, E.

OECD Nuclear Energy Agency

Lecomte, J.-F.

Institute for Radiological Protection and
Nuclear Safety, France

Linsley, G.

Consultant, United Kingdom

Maree, M.

Koeberg Nuclear Power Station, South Africa

Markkanen, M.

Radiation and Nuclear Safety Authority, Finland

100

Martincic, R.

International Atomic Energy Agency

McClelland, V.

United States Department of Energy,
United States of America

McKenna, T.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Melikhova, E.M.

Institute for the Safe Development of Atomic Power
Engineering, Russian Federation

Moeller, K.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Nestoroska Madjunarova, S.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Niu, S.

International Labour Organization

Nogueira de Oliveira, C.

International Atomic Energy Agency

Okyar, H.B.

OECD Nuclear Energy Agency

Pascal, G.

European Commission

Pather, T.

National Nuclear Regulator, South Africa

Paunio, M.

Ministry of Social Affairs and Health, Finland

Pérez, M.

World Health Organization

Plotkin, B.

World Health Organization

Ramos, M.M.

European Commission

Riland, C.A.

National Security Technologies,
United States of America

Rousseau, D.

Preparatory Commission for the Comprehensive
Nuclear-Test-Ban Treaty Organization

Sainz, J.G.

European Police Office

Scotland Wilshire, E.E.

National Oncology Institute, Panama

Soufi, I.

National Centre for Nuclear Energy, Sciences and
Technology, Morocco

Takeda, S.

Japan Atomic Energy Agency, Japan

Ugletveit, F.

Norwegian Radiation Protection Authority, Norway

101

Vincente, R.

Nuclear and Energy Research Institute, Brazil

Wahlstrom, E.

Joint United Nations Environment Programme
and United Nations Office for the Coordination
of Humanitarian Affairs Environment Unit

Weiss, W.

Federal Office for Radiation Protection, Germany

Zodiates, A.M.

International Labour Organization,
International Trade Union Confederation

102

@

No. 24

ORDERING LOCALLY
In the following countries, IAEA priced publications may be purchased from the sources listed below or
from major local booksellers.
Orders for unpriced publications should be made directly to the IAEA. The contact details are given at
the end of this list.

BELGIUM

Jean de Lannoy
Avenue du Roi 202, 1190 Brussels, BELGIUM
Telephone: +32 2 5384 308  Fax: +32 2 5380 841
Email: jean.de.lannoy@euronet.be  Web site: http://www.jean-de-lannoy.be

CANADA

Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd.
22-1010 Polytek Street, Ottawa, ON K1J 9J1, CANADA
Telephone: +1 613 745 2665  Fax: +1 643 745 7660
Email: order@renoufbooks.com  Web site: http://www.renoufbooks.com
Bernan Associates
4501 Forbes Blvd., Suite 200, Lanham, MD 20706-4391, USA
Telephone: +1 800 865 3457  Fax: +1 800 865 3450
Email: orders@bernan.com  Web site: http://www.bernan.com

CZECH REPUBLIC

Suweco CZ, s.r.o.
SESTUPNÁ 153/11, 162 00 Prague 6, CZECH REPUBLIC
Telephone: +420 242 459 205  Fax: +420 284 821 646
Email: nakup@suweco.cz  Web site: http://www.suweco.cz

FRANCE

Form-Edit
5 rue Janssen, PO Box 25, 75921 Paris CEDEX, FRANCE
Telephone: +33 1 42 01 49 49  Fax: +33 1 42 01 90 90
Email: fabien.boucard@formedit.fr  Web site: http://www.formedit.fr
Lavoisier SAS
14 rue de Provigny, 94236 Cachan CEDEX, FRANCE
Telephone: +33 1 47 40 67 00  Fax: +33 1 47 40 67 02
Email: livres@lavoisier.fr  Web site: http://www.lavoisier.fr
L’Appel du livre
99 rue de Charonne, 75011 Paris, FRANCE
Telephone: +33 1 43 07 43 43  Fax: +33 1 43 07 50 80
Email: livres@appeldulivre.fr  Web site: http://www.appeldulivre.fr

GERMANY

Goethe Buchhandlung Teubig GmbH
Schweitzer Fachinformationen
Willstätterstrasse 15, 40549 Düsseldorf, GERMANY
Telephone: +49 (0) 211 49 874 015  Fax: +49 (0) 211 49 874 28
Email: s.dehaan@schweitzer-online.de  Web site: http://www.goethebuch.de

HUNGARY

Librotrade Ltd., Book Import
Pesti ut 237. 1173 Budapest, HUNGARY
Telephone: +36 1 254-0-269  Fax: +36 1 254-0-274
Email: books@librotrade.hu  Web site: http://www.librotrade.hu

INDIA

Allied Publishers
1st Floor, Dubash House, 15, J.N. Heredi Marg, Ballard Estate, Mumbai 400001, INDIA
Telephone: +91 22 4212 6930/31/69  Fax: +91 22 2261 7928
Email: alliedpl@vsnl.com  Web site: http://www.alliedpublishers.com
Bookwell
3/79 Nirankari, Delhi 110009, INDIA
Telephone: +91 11 2760 1283/4536
Email: bkwell@nde.vsnl.net.in  Web site: http://www.bookwellindia.com

ITALY

Libreria Scientifica “AEIOU”
Via Vincenzo Maria Coronelli 6, 20146 Milan, ITALY
Telephone: +39 02 48 95 45 52  Fax: +39 02 48 95 45 48
Email: info@libreriaaeiou.eu  Web site: http://www.libreriaaeiou.eu

JAPAN

Maruzen Co., Ltd.
1-9-18 Kaigan, Minato-ku, Tokyo 105-0022, JAPAN
Telephone: +81 3 6367 6047  Fax: +81 3 6367 6160
Email: journal@maruzen.co.jp  Web site: http://maruzen.co.jp

RUSSIAN FEDERATION

Scientific and Engineering Centre for Nuclear and Radiation Safety
107140, Moscow, Malaya Krasnoselskaya st. 2/8, bld. 5, RUSSIAN FEDERATION
Telephone: +7 499 264 00 03  Fax: +7 499 264 28 59
Email: secnrs@secnrs.ru  Web site: http://www.secnrs.ru

UNITED KINGDOM

The Stationery Office Ltd. (TSO)
St. Crispins House, Duke Street, Norwich, NR3 1PD, UNITED KINGDOM
Telephone: +44 (0) 333 202 5070
Email: customer.services@tso.co.uk  Web site: http://www.tso.co.uk

UNITED STATES OF AMERICA

Bernan Associates
4501 Forbes Blvd., Suite 200, Lanham, MD 20706-4391, USA
Telephone: +1 800 865 3457  Fax: +1 800 865 3450
Email: orders@bernan.com  Web site: http://www.bernan.com
Renouf Publishing Co. Ltd.
812 Proctor Avenue, Ogdensburg, NY 13669-2205, USA
Telephone: +1 888 551 7470  Fax: +1 888 551 7471
Email: orders@renoufbooks.com  Web site: http://www.renoufbooks.com

IAEA Publishing Section, Marketing and Sales Unit
International Atomic Energy Agency
Vienna International Centre, PO Box 100, 1400 Vienna, Austria
Telephone: +43 1 2600 22529 or 22530 • Fax: +43 1 2600 29302
Email: sales.publications@iaea.org • Web site: http://www.iaea.org/books

15-22951

Orders for both priced and unpriced publications may be addressed directly to:

IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS AND RELATED PUBLICATIONS
IAEA SAFETY STANDARDS
Under the terms of Article III of its Statute, the IAEA is authorized to establish or adopt
standards of safety for protection of health and minimization of danger to life and property, and
to provide for the application of these standards.
The publications by means of which the IAEA establishes standards are issued in the
IAEA Safety Standards Series. This series covers nuclear safety, radiation safety, transport
safety and waste safety. The publication categories in the series are Safety Fundamentals,
Safety Requirements and Safety Guides.
Information on the IAEA’s safety standards programme is available on the IAEA Internet
site
http://www-ns.iaea.org/standards/
The site provides the texts in English of published and draft safety standards. The texts
of safety standards issued in Arabic, Chinese, French, Russian and Spanish, the IAEA Safety
Glossary and a status report for safety standards under development are also available. For
further information, please contact the IAEA at: Vienna International Centre, PO Box 100,
1400 Vienna, Austria.
All users of IAEA safety standards are invited to inform the IAEA of experience in their
use (e.g. as a basis for national regulations, for safety reviews and for training courses) for the
purpose of ensuring that they continue to meet users’ needs. Information may be provided via
the IAEA Internet site or by post, as above, or by email to Ofﬁcial.Mail@iaea.org.
RELATED PUBLICATIONS
The IAEA provides for the application of the standards and, under the terms of Articles III
and VIII.C of its Statute, makes available and fosters the exchange of information relating
to peaceful nuclear activities and serves as an intermediary among its Member States for this
purpose.
Reports on safety in nuclear activities are issued as Safety Reports, which provide
practical examples and detailed methods that can be used in support of the safety standards.
Other safety related IAEA publications are issued as Emergency Preparedness and
Response publications, Radiological Assessment Reports, the International Nuclear Safety
Group’s INSAG Reports, Technical Reports and TECDOCs. The IAEA also issues reports
on radiological accidents, training manuals and practical manuals, and other special safety
related publications.
Security related publications are issued in the IAEA Nuclear Security Series.
The IAEA Nuclear Energy Series comprises informational publications to encourage
and assist research on, and the development and practical application of, nuclear energy for
peaceful purposes. It includes reports and guides on the status of and advances in technology,
and on experience, good practices and practical examples in the areas of nuclear power, the
nuclear fuel cycle, radioactive waste management and decommissioning.

15-22951_PUB_1708_covers.indd 4-6

2015-11-06 14:09:01

IAEA Safety Standards

Safety through international standards

Yukiya Amano
Director General

IAEA Safety Standards Series No. GSR Part 7

“Governments, regulatory bodies and operators everywhere must
ensure that nuclear material and radiation sources are used
beneficially, safely and ethically. The IAEA safety standards are
designed to facilitate this, and I encourage all Member States to
make use of them.”

for protecting people and the environment

Preparedness and Response
for a Nuclear or
Radiological Emergency
Jointly sponsored by the
FAO, IAEA, ICAO, ILO, IMO, INTERPOL,
OECD/NEA, PAHO, CTBTO, UNEP, OCHA, WHO, WMO

1
PA H O

WH O

AHO

WHO

General Safety Requirements
No. GSR Part 7
O PS

O MS

O PA S

O MS

INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY
VIENNA
ISBN 978–92–0–105715–0
ISSN 1020–525X

15-22951_PUB_1708_covers.indd 1-3

2015-11-06 14:09:01

